VOLTAGE-SOURCED
CONVERTERS IN POWER
SYSTEMS
Modeling, Control, and Applications



Amirnaser Yazdani
University of Western Ontario

Reza Iravani
University of Toronto
VOLTAGE-SOURCED
CONVERTERS IN POWER
SYSTEMS
VOLTAGE-SOURCED
CONVERTERS IN POWER
SYSTEMS
Modeling, Control, and Applications



Amirnaser Yazdani
University of Western Ontario

Reza Iravani
University of Toronto
Copyright © 2010 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax
(978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should
be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor
author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may
not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:

Yazdani, Amirnaser, 1972–
    Voltage-sourced converters in power systems : modeling, control, and
applications / Amirnaser Yazdani, Reza Iravani.
         p. cm.
    ISBN 978-0-470-52156-4 (cloth)
  1. Electric current converters. 2. Electric power systems–Control. 3. Electric
power systems–Equipment and supplies. 4. Interconnected electric utility systems.
I. Iravani, Reza, 1955– II. Title.
    TK1007.Y39 2010
    621.31 3–dc22
                                                                       2009052122

Printed in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
To Farzaneh and Arman,
       and Suzan
CONTENTS


PREFACE                                                                 xv
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                        xvii
ACRONYMS                                                               xix

  1 Electronic Power Conversion                                          1
    1.1   Introduction     1
    1.2   Power-Electronic Converters and Converter Systems      1
    1.3   Applications of Electronic Converters in Power Systems   3
    1.4   Power-Electronic Switches     4
          1.4.1 Switch Classiﬁcation     5
          1.4.2 Switch Characteristics     8
    1.5   Classiﬁcation of Converters    8
          1.5.1 Classiﬁcation Based on Commutation Process       8
          1.5.2 Classiﬁcation Based on Terminal Voltage
                 and Current Waveforms       9
    1.6   Voltage-Sourced Converter (VSC)        10
    1.7   Basic Conﬁgurations       10
          1.7.1 Multimodule VSC Systems          11
          1.7.2 Multilevel VSC Systems        14
    1.8   Scope of the Book      20

PART I    FUNDAMENTALS                                                  21

  2 DC/AC Half-Bridge Converter                                         23
    2.1 Introduction     23
    2.2 Converter Structure     23
    2.3 Principles of Operation    25
        2.3.1 Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM)         25
        2.3.2 Converter Waveforms       26
    2.4 Converter Switched Model      27
    2.5 Converter Averaged Model      32
    2.6 Nonideal Half-Bridge Converter     38

                                                                        vii
viii      CONTENTS


               2.6.1 Analysis of Nonideal Half-Bridge Converter:
                     Positive AC-Side Current     38
               2.6.2 Analysis of Nonideal Converter: Negative
                     AC-Side Current      43
               2.6.3 Averaged Model of Nonideal Half-Bridge Converter   45

       3 Control of Half-Bridge Converter                                    48
         3.1 Introduction    48
         3.2 AC-Side Control Model of Half-Bridge Converter   48
         3.3 Control of Half-Bridge Converter     50
         3.4 Feed-Forward Compensation        53
             3.4.1 Impact on Start-Up Transient      53
             3.4.2 Impact on Dynamic Coupling Between Converter System
                    and AC System      54
             3.4.3 Impact on Disturbance Rejection Capability  57
         3.5 Sinusoidal Command Following        59

       4 Space Phasors and Two-Dimensional Frames                            69
         4.1 Introduction     69
         4.2 Space-Phasor Representation of a Balanced
             Three-Phase Function     70
             4.2.1 Deﬁnition of Space Phasor      70
             4.2.2 Changing the Amplitude and Phase Angle of a Three-phase
                    Signal 73
             4.2.3 Generating a Controllable-Amplitude/Controllable-Frequency
                    Three-Phase Signal     78
             4.2.4 Space-Phasor Representation of Harmonics       81
         4.3 Space-Phasor Representation of Three-Phase Systems       82
             4.3.1 Decoupled Symmetrical Three-Phase Systems         83
             4.3.2 Coupled Symmetrical Three-Phase Systems         87
             4.3.3 Asymmetrical Three-Phase Systems        88
         4.4 Power in Three-Wire Three-Phase Systems       88
         4.5 αβ-Frame Representation and Control of Three-Phase
             Signals and Systems     91
             4.5.1 αβ-Frame Representation of a Space Phasor       91
             4.5.2 Realization of Signal Generators/Conditioners in αβ-Frame 94
             4.5.3 Formulation of Power in αβ-Frame      95
             4.5.4 Control in αβ-Frame      96
             4.5.5 Representation of Systems in αβ-Frame      98
         4.6 dq-Frame Representation and Control of Three-Phase Systems     101
             4.6.1 dq-Frame Representation of a Space Phasor       101
             4.6.2 Formulation of Power in dq-Frame      105
             4.6.3 Control in dq-Frame      105
             4.6.4 Representation of Systems in dq-Frame      107
                                                             CONTENTS     ix

5 Two-Level, Three-Phase Voltage-Sourced Converter                  115
  5.1 Introduction     115
  5.2 Two-Level Voltage-Sourced Converter    115
      5.2.1 Circuit Structure    115
      5.2.2 Principles of Operation   116
      5.2.3 Power Loss of Nonideal Two-Level VSC     118
  5.3 Models and Control of Two-Level VSC     119
      5.3.1 Averaged Model of Two-Level VSC      119
      5.3.2 Model of Two-Level VSC in αβ-Frame      121
      5.3.3 Model and Control of Two-Level VSC in dq-Frame    124
  5.4 Classiﬁcation of VSC Systems    125


6 Three-Level, Three-Phase, Neutral-Point Clamped,
  Voltage-Sourced Converter                                         127
  6.1 Introduction    127
  6.2 Three-Level Half-Bridge NPC      128
      6.2.1 Generating Positive AC-Side Voltages    128
      6.2.2 Generating Negative AC-Side Voltages      129
  6.3 PWM Scheme For Three-Level Half-Bridge NPC         130
  6.4 Switched Model of Three-Level Half-Bridge NPC       133
      6.4.1 Switched AC-Side Terminal Voltage      133
      6.4.2 Switched DC-Side Terminal Currents      133
  6.5 Averaged Model of Three-Level Half-Bridge NPC       135
      6.5.1 Averaged AC-Side Terminal Voltage      135
      6.5.2 Averaged DC-Side Terminal Currents      135
  6.6 Three-Level NPC       136
      6.6.1 Circuit Structure    136
      6.6.2 Principles of Operation    136
      6.6.3 Midpoint Current      138
      6.6.4 Three-Level NPC with Impressed DC-Side Voltages   143
  6.7 Three-Level NPC with Capacitive DC-Side Voltage Divider 144
      6.7.1 Partial DC-Side Voltage Drift Phenomenon      145
      6.7.2 DC-Side Voltage Equalization      146
      6.7.3 Derivation of DC-Side Currents     152
      6.7.4 Uniﬁed Models of Three-Level NPC and Two-Level VSC 153
      6.7.5 Impact of DC Capacitors Voltage Ripple on
             AC-Side Harmonics       155


7 Grid-Imposed Frequency VSC System: Control in αβ-Frame            160
  7.1 Introduction     160
  7.2 Structure of Grid-Imposed Frequency VSC System   160
x    CONTENTS


      7.3 Real-/Reactive-Power Controller    161
          7.3.1 Current-Mode Versus Voltage-Mode Control       162
          7.3.2 Dynamic Model of Real-/Reactive-Power Controller     163
          7.3.3 Current-Mode Control of Real-/Reactive-Power
                 Controller   165
          7.3.4 Selection of DC-Bus Voltage Level      168
          7.3.5 Trade-Offs and Practical Considerations    173
          7.3.6 PWM with Third-Harmonic Injection        174
      7.4 Real-/Reactive-Power Controller Based on Three-Level NPC    181
          7.4.1 Midpoint Current of Three-level NPC Based on
                 Third-Harmonic Injected PWM        188
      7.5 Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port     189
          7.5.1 Model of Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port      191
          7.5.2 DC-Bus Voltage Control in Controlled DC-Voltage
                 Power Port    195
          7.5.3 Simpliﬁed and Accurate Models       200

    8 Grid-Imposed Frequency VSC System: Control in dq-Frame               204
      8.1 Introduction     204
      8.2 Structure of Grid-Imposed Frequency VSC System      205
      8.3 Real-/Reactive-Power Controller     206
          8.3.1 Current-Mode Versus Voltage-Mode Control       206
          8.3.2 Representation of Space Phasors in dq-Frame     208
          8.3.3 Dynamic Model of Real-/Reactive-Power Controller     208
          8.3.4 Phase-Locked Loop (PLL)        211
          8.3.5 Compensator Design for PLL        213
      8.4 Current-Mode Control of Real-/Reactive-Power Controller   217
          8.4.1 VSC Current Control       219
          8.4.2 Selection of DC-Bus Voltage Level     224
          8.4.3 AC-Side Equivalent Circuit      226
          8.4.4 PWM with Third-Harmonic Injection        231
      8.5 Real-/Reactive-Power Controller Based on Three-Level NPC    232
      8.6 Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port      234
          8.6.1 Model of Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port      235
          8.6.2 Control of Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port     237
          8.6.3 Simpliﬁed and Accurate Models       242

    9 Controlled-Frequency VSC System                                      245
      9.1   Introduction    245
      9.2   Structure of Controlled-Frequency VSC System   246
      9.3   Model of Controlled-Frequency VSC System     247
      9.4   Voltage Control     253
            9.4.1 Autonomous Operation        262
                                                           CONTENTS        xi

  10 Variable-Frequency VSC System                                        270
      10.1   Introduction     270
      10.2   Structure of Variable-Frequency VSC System   270
      10.3   Control of Variable-Frequency VSC System   273
             10.3.1 Asynchronous Machine       274
             10.3.2 Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Machine      288
             10.3.3 Permanent-Magnet Synchronous Machine      307


PART II   APPLICATIONS                                                    311

  11 Static Compensator (STATCOM)                                         313
      11.1   Introduction   313
      11.2   Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port    313
      11.3   STATCOM Structure       314
      11.4   Dynamic Model for PCC Voltage Control     315
             11.4.1 Large-Signal Model of PCC Voltage Dynamics      315
             11.4.2 Small-Signal Model of PCC Voltage Dynamics      318
             11.4.3 Steady-State Operating Point   320
      11.5   Approximate Model of PCC Voltage Dynamics     321
      11.6   STATCOM Control       322
      11.7   Compensator Design for PCC Voltage Controller  324
      11.8   Model Evaluation     324

  12 Back-to-Back HVDC Conversion System                                  334
      12.1 Introduction    334
      12.2 HVDC System Structure       334
      12.3 HVDC System Model        336
           12.3.1 Grid and Interface Transformer Models      336
           12.3.2 Back-to-Back Converter System Model        338
      12.4 HVDC System Control        342
           12.4.1 Phase-Locked Loop (PLL)        342
           12.4.2 dq-Frame Current-Control Scheme        345
           12.4.3 PWM Gating Signal Generator        348
           12.4.4 Partial DC-Side Voltage Equalization     349
           12.4.5 Power Flow Control      350
           12.4.6 DC-Bus Voltage Regulation       351
      12.5 HVDC System Performance Under an Asymmetrical Fault       353
           12.5.1 PCC Voltage Under an Asymmetrical Fault        354
           12.5.2 Performance of PLL Under an Asymmetrical Fault     357
           12.5.3 Performance of dq-Frame Current-Control Scheme Under
                   an Asymmetrical Fault     358
xii     CONTENTS


                12.5.4   Dynamics of DC-Bus Voltage Under an
                         Asymmetrical Fault    360
                12.5.5   Generation of Low-Order Harmonics Under an
                         Asymmetrical Fault    365
                12.5.6   Steady-State Power-Flow Under an
                         Asymmetrical Fault    369
                12.5.7   DC-Bus Voltage Control Under an
                         Asymmetrical Fault    371

      13 Variable-Speed Wind-Power System                               385
         13.1 Introduction    385
         13.2 Constant-Speed and Variable-Speed
               Wind-Power Systems       385
              13.2.1 Constant-Speed Wind-Power Systems      385
              13.2.2 Variable-Speed Wind-Power Systems      386
         13.3 Wind Turbine Characteristics    388
         13.4 Maximum Power Extraction from A Variable-Speed
               Wind-Power System       390
         13.5 Variable-Speed Wind-Power System Based
               on Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Machine      393
              13.5.1 Structure of the Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Machine-Based
                      Wind-Power System      393
              13.5.2 Machine Torque Control by Variable-Frequency
                      VSC System       395
              13.5.3 DC-Bus Voltage Regulation by Controlled DC-Voltage
                      Power Port     397
              13.5.4 Compensator Design for Controlled DC-Voltage
                      Power Port     401

APPENDIX A: Space-Phasor Representation of Symmetrical Three-Phase
           Electric Machines                                            413
         A.1    Introduction    413
         A.2    Structure of Symmetrical Three-Phase Machine    413
         A.3    Machine Electrical Model     414
                A.3.1 Terminal Voltage/Current Equations     415
                A.3.2 Stator Flux Space Phasor      415
                A.3.3 Rotor Flux Space Phasor      417
                A.3.4 Machine Electrical Torque      418
         A.4    Machine Equivalent Circuit     418
                A.4.1 Machine Dynamic Equivalent Circuit      418
                A.4.2 Machine Steady-State Equivalent Circuit    420
                                                          CONTENTS   xiii

        A.5   Permanent-Magnet Synchronous Machine (PMSM)     421
              A.5.1 PMSM Electrical Model     421
              A.5.2 PMSM Steady-State Equivalent Circuit  424

APPENDIX B: Per-Unit Values for VSC Systems                          426
        B.1   Introduction  426
              B.1.1 Base Values for AC-Side Quantities   426
              B.1.2 Base Values for DC-Side Quantities   426

REFERENCES                                                           431

INDEX                                                                439
PREFACE


The concept of electronic (static) power conversion has gained widespread acceptance
in power system applications. As such, electronic power converters are increasingly
employed for power conversion and conditioning, compensation, and active ﬁltering.
The gradual increase in the depth of penetration of distributed energy resource (DER)
units in power systems and further acceptance of new trends and concepts, for ex-
ample, microgirds, active distribution systems, and smart grids, also indicate a wider
role for power-electronic converters in the electric power system.
   While a fairly large number of books on various power-electronic converter conﬁg-
urations and their principles of operation do exist, there is a gap in terms of modeling,
analysis, and control of power-electronic converters in the context of power systems.
This book addresses this gap and concentrates on power conversion and conditioning
applications and presents the analysis and control design methodologies for a speciﬁc
class of high-power electronic converters, namely, the three-phase voltage-sourced
converter (VSC). It provides systematic, comprehensive, uniﬁed, and detailed cover-
age of the relevant materials.
   This book serves as a reference book for senior undergraduate and graduate stu-
dents in power engineering programs, practicing engineers who deal with grid integra-
tion and operation of DER systems, design engineers, and researchers in the areas of
electric power generation, transmission, distribution, and utilization. The book does
not cover implementation details of controllers; however, it contains adequate details
for system analysts and control designers and

   r describes various functions that the VSC can perform in an electric power system,
   r introduces different classes of applications of the VSC in electric power systems,
   r provides a systematic approach to modeling a VSC-based system with respect
     to its class of application,
   r presents a comprehensive and detailed control design approach for each class of
     applications, and
   r illustrates the control design procedures and evaluates the performance, based
     on digital computer time-domain simulation studies.

   The text is organized in 13 chapters. Chapter 1 provides a brief introduction to the
most commonly used electronic switches and converter conﬁgurations in the power
system. The rest of the book is divided into two parts. The ﬁrst part, Chapters 2–10,
provides theory and presents fundamental modeling and design methodologies. The

                                                                                      xv
xvi     PREFACE


second part, Chapters 11–13, covers applications of theory and design methodologies,
through three selected application cases: the static compensator (STATCOM), the
forced-commutated back-to-back HVDC converter system, and the variable-speed
wind-power systems based on the doubly fed asynchronous generator. The second
part could have included more application varieties. However, only three application
cases have been presented to highlight the main concepts, within a limited number
of pages. The PSCAD/EMTDC software package has been used to generate most of
the time-domain simulation results in the text. We would like to emphasize that the
main purpose of the numerical examples in this book is to highlight the concepts and
design methodologies. As such, the numerical values of some parameters may not be
fully consistent with the values typically adopted for speciﬁc applications.
    The reader is expected to have, at least, an undergraduate-level background in
electric circuits, electric machinery, electric power system fundamentals, and classical
(linear) control. Familiarity with power electronics and the state-space representation
of systems is a bonus but not a necessity. Relevant references are also cited throughout
the book to help the reader trace back the developments to their original sources.
While we have tried to be as comprehensive as possible, it is very likely that we have
missed some important references due to the richness of the technical literature and
the breadth of the subject matter. We would greatly appreciate any comments and
feedback from the readers, for future modiﬁcations of the book.

                                                                 Amirnaser Yazdani
                                                                 Reza Iravani

London, Ontario, Canada
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
January 2010
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am very grateful to my former Ph.D. supervisor Professor Reza Iravani (the Univer-
sity of Toronto). Without his encouragement and support this book would have never
been envisaged. During the preparation of this book, I have beneﬁted immensely from
many colleagues and friends. In particular, I would like to thank Professors Tarlochan
S. Sidhu and Serguei Primak (the University of Western Ontario) for their mentorship
and support; Professor Rajni V. Patel (the University of Western Ontario) for his dis-
cussions and invaluable insight into the subject of control theory; Professor Richard
Bonert (the University of Toronto) for his enlightening ideas on power electronics and
electromechanical energy conversion; and the late Professor Shashi B. Dewan (DPS
Inc. and University of Toronto) for providing me with the opportunity to further enrich
the book concepts through my exposure to high-power electronic converter systems
at Digital Predictive Systems (DPS) Inc. While teaching and revising the drafts of
this book, I received invaluable feedback from my graduate students to whom I am
thankful.

                                                                                 A. Y.


I would like to express my sincere thanks to the late Professor Shashi B. Dewan
whose generous and unconditional support made this work possible. Many thanks to
Professor R. Mohan Mathur who has always been a source of encouragement, and to
my colleagues Dr. Milan Graovac, Mr. Xiaolin Wang, and Dr. Armen Baronijan for
their invaluable discussions. And ﬁnally, thanks to all my former and current graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows whose research work has immensely enriched the
text.

                                                                                  R. I.




                                                                                   xvii
ACRONYMS

AC        Alternating current
CSC       Current-sourced converter
DC        Direct current
DCC       Diode-clamped converter
DER       Distributed energy resource
DFIG      Doubly-fed induction generator
DG        Distributed generation
DES       Distributed energy storage
FACTS     Flexible AC transmission systems
GTO       Gate-turn-off thyristor
HVDC      High-voltage DC
IGBT      Insulated-gate bipolar transistor
IGCT      Integrated gate-commutated thyristor
LHP       Left half plane
MIMO      Multi-input-multi-output
MOSFET    Metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistor
NPC       Neutral-point clamped
PCC       Point of common coupling
PI        Proportional-integral
PLL       Phase-locked loop
PMSM      Permanent-magnet synchronous machine
PWM       Pulse-width modulation
pu        Per-unit
PV        Photovoltaic
RHP       Right half plane
SCR       Silicon-controlled rectiﬁer
SISO      Single-input-single-output
SM        Synchronous machine
STATCOM   Static compensator
SVC       Static VAR compensator
UPS       Uninterruptible power supply
VCO       Voltage-controlled oscillator
VSC       Voltage-sourced converter




                                                             xix
1 Electronic Power Conversion
1.1   INTRODUCTION

Historically, power-electronic converters have been predominantly employed in
domestic, industrial, and information technology applications. However, due to ad-
vancements in power semiconductor and microelectronics technologies, their applica-
tion in power systems has gained considerably more attention in the past two decades.
Thus, power-electronic converters are increasingly utilized in power conditioning,
compensation, and power ﬁltering applications.
   A power-electronic converter consists of a power circuit—which can be realized
through a variety of conﬁgurations of power switches and passive components—and
a control/protection system. The link between the two is through gating/switching
signals and feedback control signals. This chapter brieﬂy introduces power circuits
of the most commonly used power-electronic converters for high-power applica-
tions. In the subsequent chapters, two speciﬁc conﬁgurations, that is, the two-level
voltage-sourced converter (VSC) and the three-level neutral-point clamped (NPC)
converter, are analyzed in more detail. This book focuses on the modeling and con-
trol aspects of the two-level VSC and the three-level NPC converter. However, the
presented analysis techniques and the control design methodologies are conceptually
also applicable to the other families of power-electronic converters introduced in this
chapter.


1.2 POWER-ELECTRONIC CONVERTERS AND CONVERTER
SYSTEMS

In this book we deﬁne a power-electronic (or static) converter as a multiport circuit that
is composed of semiconductor (electronic) switches and can also include auxiliary
components and apparatus, for example, capacitors, inductors, and transformers. The
main function of a converter is to facilitate the exchange of energy between two (or
more) subsystems, in a desired manner, based on prespeciﬁed performance speciﬁca-
tions. The subsystems often have different attributes in terms of voltage/current wave-
forms, frequency, phase angle, and number of phases, and therefore cannot be directly



Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                        1
2    ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION


interfaced with each other, that is, without power-electronic converters. For instance,
a power-electronic converter is required to interface a wind turbine/generator unit,
that is, an electromechanical subsystem that generates a variable-frequency/variable-
voltage electricity, with the constant-frequency/constant-voltage utility grid, that is,
another electromechanical subsystem.
   In the technical literature, converters are commonly categorized based on
the type of electrical subsystems, that is, AC or DC, that they interface.
Thus,

    r A DC-to-AC or DC/AC converter interfaces a DC subsystem to an AC sub-
      system.
    r A DC-to-DC or DC/DC converter interfaces two DC subsystems.
    r An AC-to-AC or AC/AC converter interfaces two AC subsystems.

Based on the foregoing classiﬁcation, a DC/AC converter is equivalent to an AC/DC
converter. Hence, in this book, the terms DC/AC converter and AC/DC converter
are used interchangeably. The conventional diode-bridge rectiﬁer is an example of
a DC/AC converter. A DC/AC converter is called a rectiﬁer if the ﬂow of average
power is from the AC side to the DC side. Alternatively, the converter is called an
inverter if the average power ﬂow is from the DC side to the AC side. Speciﬁc classes
of DC/AC converters provide bidirectional power-transfer capability, that is, they can
operate either as a rectiﬁer or as an inverter. Other types, for example, the diode-bridge
converter, can only operate as a rectiﬁer.
    DC/DC converter and AC/AC converter are also referred to as DC converter and
AC converter, respectively. A DC converter can directly interface two DC subsystems,
or it can employ an intermediate AC link. In the latter case, the converter is composed
of two back-to-back DC/AC converters which are interfaced through their AC sides.
Similarly, an AC converter can be direct, for example, the matrix converter, or it can
employ an intermediate DC link. The latter type consists of two back-to-back DC/AC
converters which are interfaced through their DC sides. This type is also known as
AC/DC/AC converter, which is widely used in AC motor drives and variable-speed
wind-power conversion units.
    In this book, we deﬁne a power-electronic converter system (or a converter
system) as a composition of one (or more) power-electronic converter(s) and
a control/protection scheme. The link between the converter(s) and the con-
trol/protection scheme is established through gating signals issued for semicon-
ductor switches, and also through feedback signals. Thus, the transfer of energy
in a converter system is accomplished through appropriate switching of the semi-
conductor switches by the control scheme, based on the overall desired perfor-
mance, the supervisory commands, and the feedback from a multitude of system
variables.
    This book concentrates on modeling and control of a speciﬁc class of converter
systems, this is, the VSC systems. This class is introduced in Section 1.6.
               APPLICATIONS OF ELECTRONIC CONVERTERS IN POWER SYSTEMS               3

1.3 APPLICATIONS OF ELECTRONIC CONVERTERS IN POWER
SYSTEMS

For a long time, applications of high-power converter systems in electric power sys-
tems were limited to high-voltage DC (HVDC) transmission systems and, to a lesser
extent, to the conventional static VAR compensator (SVC) and electronic excitation
systems of synchronous machines. However, since the late 1980s, the applications
in electric power systems, for generation, transmission, distribution, and delivery
of electric power, have continuously gained more attention [1–6]. The main rea-
sons are

   r Rapid and ongoing developments in power electronics technology and the avail-
     ability of various types of semiconductor switches for high-power applications.
   r Ongoing advancements in microelectronics technology that have enabled real-
     ization of sophisticated signal processing and control strategies and the corre-
     sponding algorithms for a wide range of applications.
   r Restructuring trends in the electric utility sector that necessitate the use of
     power-electronic-based equipment to deal with issues such as power line
     congestion.
   r Continuous growth in energy demand that has resulted in close-to-the-limit uti-
     lization of the electric power utility infrastructure, calling for the employment
     of electronic power apparatus for stability enhancement.
   r The shift toward further utilization of green energy, in response to the global
     warming phenomenon, and environmental concerns associated with centralized
     power generation. The trend has gained momentum due to recent technological
     developments and has resulted in economic and technical viability of alternative
     energy resources and, in particular, renewable energy resources. Such energy
     resources are often interfaced with the electric power system through power-
     electronic converters.

In addition, development of new operational concepts and strategies, for example,
microgrids, active networks, and smart grids [7], also indicates that the role and
importance of power electronics in electric power systems will signiﬁcantly grow.
The envisioned future roles of power-electronic converter systems in power systems
include

   r Enhancement of efﬁciency and reliability of the existing power generation, trans-
     mission, distribution, and delivery infrastructure.
   r Integration of large-scale renewable energy resources and storage systems in
     electric power grids.
   r Integration of distributed energy resources, both distributed generation and dis-
     tributed storage units, primarily, at subtransmission and distribution voltage
     levels.
4       ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION

      r Maximization of the depth of penetration of renewable distributed energy
       resources.

Power-electronic converter systems are employed in electric power systems for

      r Active Filtering: The main function of a power-electronic-based active ﬁlter
        is to synthesize and inject (or absorb) speciﬁc current or voltage compo-
        nents, to enhance power quality in the host power system. A comprehen-
        sive treatment of the concepts and controls of active power ﬁlters is given in
        Ref. [8].
      r Compensation: The function of a power-electronic (static) compensator, in either
        a transmission or a distribution line, is to increase the power-transfer capability
        of the line, to maximize the efﬁciency of the power transfer, to enhance voltage
        and angle stability, to improve power quality, or to fulﬁll a combination of the
        foregoing objectives. Various static compensation techniques have been exten-
        sively discussed in the technical literature under the general umbrella of ﬂexible
        AC transmission systems (FACTS) and custom-power controllers [1–6]. The
        FACTS controllers include, but are not limited to, the static synchronous com-
        pensator (STATCOM), the static synchronous series compensator (SSSC), the
        intertie power ﬂow controller (IPFC), the uniﬁed power ﬂow controller (UPFC),
        and the semiconductor-controlled phase shifter.
      r Power Conditioning: The main function of an electronic power conditioner
        is to enable power exchange between two electrical (or electromechanical)
        subsystems in a controlled manner. The power conditioner often has to
        ensure that speciﬁc requirements of subsystems, for example, the frequency,
        voltage magnitude, power factor, and velocity of the rotating machines, are met.
        Examples of electronic power conditioning systems include but are not limited to
        1. the back-to-back HVDC system that interfaces two AC subsystems that can
            be synchronous, asynchronous, or even of different frequencies [9];
        2. the HVDC rectiﬁer/inverter system that transfers electrical power through a
            DC tie line between two electrically remote AC subsystems [10, 11];
        3. the AC/DC/AC converter system that transfers the AC power from a
            variable-frequency wind-power unit to the utility grid; and
        4. the DC/AC converter system that transfers the DC power from a DC
            distributed energy resource (DER) unit, for example, a photovoltaic (PV)
            solar array, a fuel cell, or a battery storage unit, to the utility grid [12, 13].


1.4     POWER-ELECTRONIC SWITCHES

Power-electronic semiconductor switches (or electronic switches) are the main build-
ing blocks of power-electronic converters. A power-electronic switch is a semicon-
ductor device that can permit and/or interrupt the ﬂow of current through a branch
                                                            POWER-ELECTRONIC SWITCHES                   5

of the host circuit, by the application of a gating signal.1 This is in contrast to the
operation of a mechanical switch in which the on/off transition is achieved through a
mechanical process, for example, the movement of a mechanical arm. A mechanical
switch

    r is slow and thus not intended for repetitive switching;
    r essentially includes moving parts and therefore is subject to loss of lifetime dur-
      ing each switching action and thus, compared to an electronic switch, provides
      a limited number of on/off operations; and
    r introduces relatively low power loss during conduction, such that it can be prac-
      tically considered as a closer representation to an ideal switch.

By contrast, an electronic switch

    r is fast and intended for continuous switching;
    r includes no moving part and thus is not subject to loss of lifetime during turn-on
      and turn-off processes; and
    r introduces switching and conduction power losses.


The above-mentioned characteristics of the mechanical and electronic switches indi-
cate that for some applications a combination of mechanical and electronic switches
can provide an optimum solution in terms of switching speed and power loss. How-
ever, the trend in the development of power semiconductor switches [14, 15] points
toward ever-increasing utilization of electronic switches. The effort to increase the
maximum permissible switching frequency and to minimize switching and conduc-
tion losses is the subject of major research and development programs of the power
semiconductor switch industry.


1.4.1    Switch Classiﬁcation
The characteristics of a power-electronic converter mainly depend on the type of
its semiconductor switches. It is therefore warranted to brieﬂy review different
switch types. Further details regarding the operation and characteristics of the most
commonly used switches can be found in Refs. [16, 17].

1.4.1.1 Uncontrollable Switches The power diode is a two-layer semiconductor
device and the only uncontrollable switch. It is uncontrollable since the current con-
duction and interruption instants are determined by the host electrical circuit. Power

1 The only exception is diode that conducts current based on the conditions of the host circuit and not in

response to a gating signal.
6     ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION


diodes are extensively used in power-electronic converter circuits as stand-alone com-
ponents, and/or as integral parts of other switches.


1.4.1.2 Semicontrollable Switches The most widely used semicontrollable elec-
tronic switch is the thyristor or the silicon-controlled rectiﬁer (SCR). The thyristor
is a four-layer semiconductor device that is half- or semicontrollable, since only the
instant at which its current conduction starts can be determined by a gating signal,
provided that the device is properly voltage biased. However, the current interruption
instant of the thyristor is determined by the host electrical circuit. The thyristor has
been, and even currently is, the switch of choice for HVDC converters, although in
recent years fully controllable switches have also been considered and utilized for
HVDC applications.


1.4.1.3 Fully Controllable Switches The current conduction and interruption in-
stants of a fully controllable switch can be determined by means of a gating command.
Most widely used fully controllable switches include

    r Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET): The MOSFET
      is a three-layer semiconductor device. Compared to other fully controllable
      power switches, current and voltage ratings of power MOSFETs are fairly lim-
      ited. Consequently, the application of power MOSFETs is conﬁned to relatively
      lower power converters where a high switching frequency is the main require-
      ment.
    r Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT): The IGBT is also a three-layer semi-
      conductor device. The power IGBT has signiﬁcantly evolved since the early
      1990s, in terms of the switching frequency, the current rating, and the voltage
      rating. At present, it is used for a broad spectrum of applications in electric power
      systems.
    r Gate-Turn-Off Thyristor (GTO): The GTO is structurally a four-layer semicon-
      ductor device and can be turned on and off by external gating signals. The GTO
      requires a relatively large, negative current pulse to turn off. This requirement
      calls for an elaborate and lossy drive scheme. Among the fully controllable
      switches, the GTO used to be the switch of choice for high-power applications
      in the late 1980s and early 1990s. However, it has lost signiﬁcant ground to the
      IGBT in the last several years.
    r Integrated Gate-Commutated Thyristor (IGCT): The IGCT conceptually and
      structurally is a GTO switch with mitigated turn-off drive requirements. In addi-
      tion, the IGCT has a lower on-state voltage drop and can also be switched faster
      compared to the GTO. In recent years, the IGCT has gained considerable atten-
      tion for high-power converters due to its voltage/current handling capabilities.

In terms of voltage/current handling capability, the semicontrollable and fully con-
trollable switches are classiﬁed as follows:
                                                   POWER-ELECTRONIC SWITCHES            7

   r Unidirectional Switch: A unidirectional switch can conduct current in only one
     direction. Hence, the switch turns off and assumes a reverse voltage when its
     current crosses zero and attempts to go negative. A unidirectional switch can be
     bipolar (symmetrical) or unipolar (asymmetrical). A bipolar switch can with-
     stand a relatively large reverse voltage. The thyristor is an example of a bipolar,
     unidirectional switch. A unipolar switch, however, has a relatively small reverse
     breakdown voltage; thus, a voltage exceeding the switch reverse breakdown volt-
     age results in a reverse in-rush current that can damage the switch. Therefore,
     to prevent the reverse breakdown and the consequent damage, a diode can be
     connected in antiparallel with the unipolar switch that also makes the switch
     reverse conducting. The GTO and the IGCT are commercially available in both
     unipolar and bipolar types. The current-sourced converter (CSC), described in
     Section 1.5.2, requires bipolar, unidirectional switches.
   r Reverse-Conducting Switch: A reverse-conducting switch is realized when a
     unidirectional switch, whether unipolar or bipolar, is connected in antiparallel
     with a diode. Hence, a reverse-conducting switch can be regarded as a unipolar
     switch whose reverse breakdown voltage is approximately equal to the forward
     voltage drop of a diode. Thus, a reverse-conducting switch starts to conduct
     in the opposite direction if it is reverse biased by only a few volts. The IGBT
     and the power MOSFET are examples of reverse-conducting switches. Reverse-
     conducting IGCT switches are also commercially available. In this book, we refer
     to a fully controllable reverse-conducting switch also as a switch cell, generically
     illustrated in Figure 1.1(a). The VSC, deﬁned later in this chapter, requires
     reverse-conducting switches (switch cells). Figure 1.1(b) shows two common
     symbolic representations of a switch cell in which the gate control terminal is
     not shown.
   r Bidirectional Switch: A bidirectional switch can conduct and interrupt the cur-
     rent in both directions. Essentially, a bidirectional switch is also a bipolar switch
     since in the off state it must withstand both forward and reverse voltage bi-
     ases. An example of a (semicontrollable) bidirectional switch are two thyristors
     that are connected in antiparallel. It should be pointed out that, to date, there




FIGURE 1.1 (a) Generic schematic diagram of a switch cell. (b) Symbolic representations
of a switch cell.
8       ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION


        exists no fully controllable bidirectional single-device switch technology. Hence,
        such a switch must be realized through antiparallel connection of two bipolar
        unidirectional switches. Fully controllable bidirectional switches are required
        for matrix converters [18].

1.4.2     Switch Characteristics
In the context of electronic power conversion, semiconductor switches are almost
exclusively used in the switching mode, that is, the switch is either in the on state or in
the off state. The steady-state and switching properties of an electronic switch are con-
ventionally illustrated and characterized by, respectively, the switch current/voltage
waveforms and the characteristic curves in the current-versus-voltage (v–i) plane.
For system studies and control design purposes, especially for high-power converters
where the switching frequencies are typically low, simpliﬁed switch models are
often adopted. Such models retain the device features relevant to the study, while
considerably reduce the modeling, analytical, and computational burden. However,
depending on the objectives of a speciﬁc investigation, the accuracy of waveforms
and results can be enhanced if more elaborate switch models are employed. For
example, if the switching loss of a converter is of interest, the diode reverse recovery
and the transistor tailing current effects [16] must be included in the model of
switches.
   In this book, the on- and off-state characteristics of an electronic switch are ap-
proximated by corresponding straight lines in the v–i plane. Thus, transient switch-
ing processes such as the reverse recovery, the tailing current, and so on are
ignored, and transition from one state to the other is generally assumed to be instan-
taneous. However, to demonstrate the methodology, in Section 2.6 we employ more
detailed models of switches to estimate the power loss of a DC/AC voltage-sourced
converter.


1.5     CLASSIFICATION OF CONVERTERS

There are a variety of approaches to classiﬁcation of power-electronic converters. This
section introduces two categorization methods relevant to high-power applications.


1.5.1     Classiﬁcation Based on Commutation Process
One widely used approach to the categorization of converters is based on the com-
mutation process, deﬁned as the transfer of current from branch i to branch j of a
circuit, when the switch of branch i turns off while that of branch j turns on. Based on
this deﬁnition, the following two classes of converters are identiﬁed in the technical
literature:

      r Line-Commutated Converter: For a line-commutated (naturally-commutated)
        converter, the electrical AC system dictates the commutation process. Thus,
                                                CLASSIFICATION OF CONVERTERS            9

     the commutation process is initiated by the reversal of the AC voltage po-
     larity. The conventional six-pulse thyristor-bridge converter, widely used in
     HVDC transmission systems, is an example of a line-commutated converter
     [19]. The line-commutated converter is also known as the naturally-commuted
     converter.
   r Forced-Commutated Converter: For a forced-commutated converter, the trans-
     fer of current from one switch to another one is a controlled process. Thus, in this
     type of converter, either the switches must be fully controllable, that is, they must
     have the gate-turn-off capability, or the turn-off process must be accomplished
     by auxiliary turn-off circuitry, for example, an auxiliary switch or a capacitor. A
     forced-commutated converter that utilizes switches with the gate-turn-off capa-
     bility is also known as a self-commutated converter. Self-commutated converters
     are of great interest for power systems applications and are the main focus of
     this book.

It should be noted that in speciﬁc power-electronic converter conﬁgurations,
switches may not be subjected to the current commutation process, in which case the
converter is referred to as a converter without commutation. For example, the two
antiparallel thyristors in the conventional SVC can be regarded as a converter without
commutation.



1.5.2   Classiﬁcation Based on Terminal Voltage and Current Waveforms
DC/AC converters can also be classiﬁed based on voltage and current waveforms
at their DC ports. Thus, a current-sourced converter (CSC) is a converter in which
the DC-side current retains the same polarity, and therefore, the direction of average
power ﬂow through the converter is determined by the polarity of the DC-side volt-
age. The DC side of a CSC is typically connected in series with a relatively large
inductor that maintains the current continuity and is more representative of a cur-
rent source. For example, the conventional, six-pulse, thyristor-bridge rectiﬁer is a
CSC. In a voltage-sourced converter (VSC), however, the DC-side voltage retains the
same polarity, and the direction of the converter average power ﬂow is determined
by the polarity of the DC-side current. The DC-side terminals of a VSC are typically
connected in parallel with a relatively large capacitor that resembles a voltage source.
    Compared to the VSC, the forced-commutated CSC has not been as widely used
for power system applications. The reason is that a CSC requires bipolar electronic
switches. However, the power semiconductor industry has not yet fully established a
widespread commercial supply of fast, fully controllable bipolar switches. Although
bipolar versions of the GTO and the IGCT are commercially available, they are
limited in terms of switching speed and are mainly tailored for very high-power
electronic converters. Unlike the CSC, a VSC requires reverse-conducting switches
or switch cells. The switch cells are commercially available as the IGBT or the reverse-
conducting IGCT. Prior to the dominance of the IGBT and the IGCT, each switch of
the VSC was realized through antiparallel connection of a GTO with a diode.
10      ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION


1.6    VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER (VSC)

The focus of this book is on modeling and control of the VSC and VSC-based systems.
In the next section, the most common VSC conﬁgurations are brieﬂy introduced.


1.7    BASIC CONFIGURATIONS

Figure 1.2 shows the basic circuit diagram of a half-bridge, single-phase, two-level
VSC. The half-bridge VSC consists of an upper switch cell and a lower switch cell.
Each switch cell is composed of a fully controllable, unidirectional switch in antiparal-
lel connection with a diode. As explained in Section 1.4.1.3, this switch conﬁguration
constitutes a reverse-conducting switch that is readily available, for example, in the
form of commercial IGBT and IGCT. The DC system that maintains the net voltage
of the split capacitor can be a DC source, a battery unit, or a more elaborate conﬁgu-
ration such as the DC side of an AC/DC converter. The half-bridge VSC of Figure 1.2
is called a two-level converter since the switched AC-side voltage, at any instant, is
either at the voltage of node p or at the voltage of node n, depending on which switch
cell is on. The fundamental component of the AC-side voltage is usually controlled
based on a pulse-width modulation (PWM) technique [16, 20].
    If two half-bridge VSCs are connected in parallel through their DC sides, the
full-bridge single-phase VSC of Figure 1.3 is realized. Thus, as shown in Figure 1.3,
the AC system can be interfaced with the AC-side terminals of the two half-bridge
converters. One advantage is that, for a given DC voltage, the synthesized AC voltage
of the full-bridge VSC is twice as large in comparison with the half-bridge VSC,
which corresponds to a more efﬁcient utilization of the DC voltage and switch cells.
The full-bridge VSC of Figure 1.3 is also known as the H-bridge converter.
    Figure 1.4 illustrates the schematic diagram of a three-phase two-level VSC. The
three-phase VSC is also an extension of the half-bridge VSC of Figure 1.2. In power
system applications, the three-phase VSC is interfaced with the AC system, typically,
through a three-phase transformer, based on a three-wire connection. In case a four-
wire interface is required, either the VSC must permit access to the midpoint of
its split DC-side capacitor, through the fourth wire (or the neutral wire), or it must




      FIGURE 1.2 Schematic diagrams of the half-bridge, single-phase, two-level VSC.
                                                        BASIC CONFIGURATIONS          11




FIGURE 1.3 (a) Schematic diagram of the full-bridge, single-phase, two-level VSC (or an
H-bridge converter). (b) Symbolic representation of the H-bridge converter.


be augmented with an additional half-bridge converter, to represent the fourth leg
identical to the other three legs, whose AC terminal is connected to the fourth wire.
Various PWM and space-vector modulation techniques for switching the three-phase
two-level VSC are described in Ref. [20].
   The principles of operation of the half-bridge VSC and the three-phase VSC are
discussed in Chapters 2 and 5, respectively.


1.7.1   Multimodule VSC Systems
In high-voltage, high-power VSCs, the switch cell of Figure 1.2(b), which is
composed of a fully controllable, unidirectional switch and a diode, may not be able
to handle the voltage/current requirements. To overcome this limitation, the switch
cells are connected in series and/or in parallel and form a composite switch structure
which is called a valve. Figure 1.5 shows two valve conﬁgurations composed of
parallel- and series-connected identical switch cells. In most applications, the existing
power semiconductor switches meet current handling requirements. However, in




FIGURE 1.4 (a) Schematic diagram of the three-wire, three-phase, two-level VSC. (b) The
symbolic representation of the three-phase VSC.
12    ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION




FIGURE 1.5 Symbolic representations of a valve composed of (a) m parallel-connected
switch cells and (b) k series-connected switch cells.


most applications, series-connected switch cells are inevitably required to satisfy the
voltage requirements. Due to various practical limitations including unacceptable
form factor, unequal off-state voltage distribution, and simultaneous-gating require-
ments, the number of series-connected switch cells within a valve is limited. Thus, a
two-level VSC unit cannot be constructed for any voltage level, and an upper voltage
limit applies.
    The maximum permissible voltage limit of a VSC system can be increased by series
connection of identical, three-phase, two-level VSC modules, to form a multimodule
VSC [21]. Figure 1.6 illustrates a schematic diagram of an n-module VSC in which
n identical two-level VSC modules are connected in series and parallel, respectively,
at their AC and DC ports. Thus, the VSC modules share the same DC-bus capacitor.
Figure 1.7 illustrates an alternative conﬁguration of an n-module VSC in which the
two-level VSC modules are connected in series at both the AC and DC sides. In both
conﬁgurations of Figures 1.6 and 1.7, the AC-side voltages of the VSC modules are
added up by the corresponding open-winding transformers, to achieve the desired
voltage level (and waveform) for connection to the AC system. One of the salient
features of the n-module VSC conﬁgurations of Figures 1.6 and 1.7 is their modularity,
as all the VSC modules and transformers are identical. Modularity is a desired feature
that reduces manufacturing costs, facilitates maintenance, and permits provisions for
spare parts.
    The multimodule converter of Figure 1.7 can be further enhanced to acquire
the AC-side voltage harmonic reduction capability of a multipulse conﬁguration
while its modularity is preserved. This is achieved through appropriate phase shift
in switching patterns of the constituent VSC modules, such that a prespeciﬁed set
of voltage harmonics are canceled/minimized when added up by the open-winding
                                                       BASIC CONFIGURATIONS         13




FIGURE 1.6 Schematic diagram of a multimodule VSC composed of n two-level VSC
modules paralleled from their DC sides.



transformers. The harmonic minimization enables operation of the multimodule con-
verter at low switching frequencies, which, in turn, results in lower switching losses;
it also mitigates the need for low-frequency harmonic ﬁlters at the converter AC
side [22].
    The concept of multipulse conversion is another technique employed to mini-
mize low-frequency harmonic components of the synthesized AC voltage of a VSC
[23], and thus to minimize the associated ﬁltering requirements. Figure 1.8 shows a
schematic diagram of a 12-pulse, thyristor-bridge CSC system that has been exten-
sively used in conventional HVDC transmission applications. As Figure 1.8 shows, the
12-pulse operation of the CSC requires a 30-degree phase shift between the AC-side
voltages of the two CSCs. This phase shift is realized by means of two transformers
14      ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION




FIGURE 1.7 Schematic diagram of a multimodule VSC composed of n two-level VSC
modules series with respect to their DC sides.


of different winding conﬁgurations. Therefore, the modularity is not fully preserved
in the conﬁguration of Figure 1.8.


1.7.2   Multilevel VSC Systems
Another option for a VSC system to accommodate the voltage requirements of a high-
power application is to utilize a multilevel voltage synthesis strategy. Conceptually,
the multilevel VSC conﬁgurations [17] can be divided into

     r the H-bridge-based multilevel VSC;
     r the capacitor-clamped multilevel VSC; and
     r the diode-clamped multilevel VSC.
                                                     BASIC CONFIGURATIONS        15




FIGURE 1.8 Schematic diagram of a 12-pulse, line-commutated, thyristor-bridge-based
CSC.



   The H-bridge-based multilevel VSC, also called the cascaded H-bridge multi-
level VSC, is constructed through series connection of the H-bridge modules of
Figure 1.3(b). Figure 1.9 shows a schematic diagram of a three-phase, wye-connected,
H-bridge-based, multilevel VSC. For this conﬁguration, especially if real-power
exchange is involved, the DC-bus voltage of each H-bridge module must be
independently supplied and regulated by an auxiliary converter system. This renders
the H-bridge-based VSC of Figure 1.9 practically unattractive for general-purpose
applications; rather, the H-bridge-based converter is more suitable for speciﬁc
applications, for example, the STATCOM, where only reactive-power exchange is the
objective.
   One salient feature of the conﬁguration of Figure 1.9 is that it permits in-
dependent control of the three legs of the converter. If a (grounded) neutral
conductor is provided, the converter can also provide independent control over
the zero-sequence components of the three-phase current, in addition to the
positive-sequence and the negative-sequence components. It should be noted that
the three-wire, three-phase VSC conﬁgurations of Figures 1.4 and 1.7 can be
controlled to respond only to the positive-sequence and the negative-sequence
components.
16    ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION




 FIGURE 1.9 Schematic diagram of a wye-connected, H-bridge-based, multilevel VSC.



    The capacitor-clamped multilevel VSC is another class of multilevel converter
conﬁgurations. This type of converter is characterized by a large number of relatively
large-size capacitors. One of the technical challenges associated with this type of
converter is the regulation of its capacitors’ voltages. Consequently, the application
of the capacitor-clamped multilevel VSC in power systems has not been widely sought
in practice and will not be discussed in this book.
    The diode-clamped, multilevel, voltage-sourced converter (DCC) is a generaliza-
tion of the two-level VSC of Figure 1.4(a). This conﬁguration largely avoids the
drawbacks of the other two multilevel converter conﬁgurations and is considered
a promising conﬁguration for power system applications. Figure 1.10 illustrates a
conceptual diagram of an n-level DCC in which each leg of the converter is sym-
bolically represented by a ﬁctitious n-tuple-through switch, and the DC bus consists
                                                       BASIC CONFIGURATIONS         17




              FIGURE 1.10 Conceptual representation of an n-level DCC.


of n − 1 nominally identical capacitors C1 to Cn−1 . Based on the switching strategy
devised for the n-level DCC, each switch in Figure 1.10 connects the correspond-
ing AC-side terminal to one of the nodes 0 to n − 1 at the converter DC side. Thus,
the AC-side terminal voltage can assume one of the n discrete voltage values of
the DC-side nodes. Figures 1.11 and 1.12 illustrate circuit realizations for the three-
level DCC and the ﬁve-level DCC, respectively. The three-level DCC is also known
as the neutral-point diode-clamped (NPC) converter, which is widely accepted for
18     ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION




     FIGURE 1.11 Schematic diagram of the three-level DCC (or the NPC converter).


high-power applications. Compared to a two-level VSC of the same rating, the three-
level DCC can offer a less distorted synthesized AC voltage, lower switching losses,
and reduced switch stress levels.
   One main technical requirement for proper operation of an n-level DCC is to
maintain the voltages of its DC-bus capacitors at their prescribed (usually equal)
levels and to prevent voltage drifts during the steady-state and dynamic regimes.
In a DCC, net DC-bus voltage regulation cannot guarantee proper operation of the
converter system since the individual capacitor voltages may drift or even entirely
collapse. This is in contrast to the case of the three-wire two-level VSC for which net
DC voltage regulation guarantees proper operation. Provision of a DC-side voltage
equalizing scheme is essential for the operation of the DCC.
   Conceptually, there are two approaches to deal with the DC capacitor voltage drift
phenomenon in a DCC. The ﬁrst approach is to utilize an auxiliary power circuitry.
The auxiliary circuitry can be a set of independent power supplies for capacitors,
or it can be a dedicated electronic converter—of a considerably smaller capacity—
that injects current into the capacitors and regulates their voltages. The approach is,
however, not appealing for power systems applications due to its cost and complexity.
   The second approach to equalize the voltages of the DC-side capacitors of a
DCC is to enhance the converter control strategy, to modify the switching pat-
terns of the switches such that the capacitors’ voltages are regulated at their cor-
responding desired values. Although this approach calls for a more elaborate con-
trol strategy, it offers an economically viable and technically elegant solution to the
problem.
   It should be pointed out that the number of levels of the multilevel DCC can be
higher than three. Therefore, the DCC can accommodate noticeably higher AC and
                                                     BASIC CONFIGURATIONS       19




               FIGURE 1.12 Schematic diagram of the ﬁve-level DCC.




DC voltages, compared to the two-level VSC. However, there is also a limit to the
maximum attainable voltage level of a multilevel DCC. Thus, the application of a
multilevel DCC in a high-voltage system, for example, an HVDC system, practically
may require a multimodule structure similar to that of Figure 1.7, with each module
being a multilevel DCC itself. Chapter 6 provides modeling and analysis techniques
for the three-level DCC.
20    ELECTRONIC POWER CONVERSION


1.8   SCOPE OF THE BOOK

In a power-electronic converter system, the functions required for active ﬁltering, com-
pensation, and power conditioning are enabled through the proper operation of the
converter control/protection scheme, which ﬁnally determines the switching instants
of the converter switches. The remainder of this book discusses the mathematical
modeling, transient and steady-state behavior, and control design methodologies for
a number of VSC-based systems. To limit the number of pages, the methodologies
are presented only for the two-level VSC and the three-level DCC. This provides
the reader with a comprehensive understanding of the principles of operation, oper-
ational characteristics, and control design considerations for the two basic, yet most
commonly used, VSC-based conﬁgurations. Thus, no attempt has been made in this
book to present methodologies for every VSC-based conﬁguration. However, with
the understanding gained through this book, the reader should be able to extend and
apply similar techniques to different VSC-based systems. Although the book primar-
ily focuses on VSC applications in power conditioning systems, the developments
are largely applicable also to compensation systems.
PART I
Fundamentals
2 DC/AC Half-Bridge Converter
2.1    INTRODUCTION

This chapter investigates the DC/AC half-bridge converter as a building block for the
multiphase, in particular three-phase, DC/AC voltage-sourced converter (VSC). In
Chapter 5, based on the insight obtained through this chapter, we extend the model of
the half-bridge converter to study the three-phase DC/AC VSC. This chapter presents
the steady-state and dynamic models of the half-bridge converter to the extent that
we will be able to directly exploit the results for the multiphase DC/AC VSC.


2.2    CONVERTER STRUCTURE

Figure 2.1 shows a schematic diagram of a DC/AC half-bridge converter [16].1 The
half-bridge converter is composed of two switch cells. The upper and lower switch
cells are numbered 1 and 4, respectively. Each switch cell is realized by antiparallel
connection of a fully controllable unidirectional switch and a diode. As discussed in
Section 1.4.1.3, such a switch cell is also known as a reverse-conducting switch and
is commercially available as IGBT or IGCT.2 For ease of reference, throughout this
chapter we refer to the fully controllable switch as the transistor, for which we have
adopted the circuit symbol of the conventional bipolar junction transistor. Thus, the
upper switch cell consists of the transistor Q1 and the diode D1 . Similarly, the lower
switch cell is composed of the transistor Q4 and the diode D4 . As Figure 2.1 shows, in
each transistor the positive current is deﬁned as the current ﬂowing from the collector
to the emitter. The positive current in the diode is deﬁned as the current ﬂowing from
the anode to the cathode. The currents through the upper and lower switch cells are
denoted by ip and in , respectively, as shown in Figure 2.1. Thus, ip = iQ1 − iD1 and
in = −(iQ4 − iD4 ).
    Nodes p and n in Figure 2.1 signify the DC-side terminals (or the DC side) of
the half-bridge converter. Similarly, we specify the AC-side terminal (or the AC side)
of the half-bridge converter by node t. From the DC side, the half-bridge converter

1 The conﬁguration shown in Figure 2.1 is also known as a four-quadrant chopper [19].
2 IGBT, IGCT, and GTO stand, respectively, for insulated-gate bipolar transistor, integrated gate-

commutated thyristor, and gate-turn-off thyristor (see Section 1.4.1.3.).

Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,      by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                               23
24      DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




         FIGURE 2.1 Simpliﬁed power circuit diagram of a half-bridge converter.




of Figure 2.1 is connected to two identical DC voltage sources, each with a voltage
of VDC /2. The common point of the voltage sources is labeled as node 0. We refer to
this node as the DC-side midpoint and choose it as the voltage reference node.
    From the AC side, the half-bridge converter is interfaced with the voltage source Vs ,
which we refer to as the AC-side voltage source. The negative terminal of the AC-side
voltage source is connected to the DC-side midpoint.3 The connection between the
AC-side terminal and the AC-side voltage source is established through an interface
reactor represented by a series RL branch. The AC-side terminal voltage, Vt , is a
switched waveform and contains voltage ripple.4 Thus, the interface reactor acts as
a ﬁlter and ensures a low-ripple AC-side current. L and R, respectively, represent
the inductance and the internal resistance of the interface reactor. In some cases, the
load or the AC-side source embeds the interface reactor, and no external RL branch
is provided. For example, in an electric drive system, the inductance of the machine
stator is utilized as the interface reactor between the converter and the machine.

3 In subsequent chapters, we remove the connection path between the AC-side voltage source and the DC-

side midpoint, when we extend the DC/AC half-bridge converter to the three-phase VSC; then, the negative
terminal of the AC-side voltage source assumes a voltage, Vn , with reference to the DC-side midpoint.
4 Conventionally, the term ripple is deﬁned for a DC waveform as the whole waveform minus its average

component. In this book, we deﬁne the ripple of a—not necessarily DC—waveform as the time-domain
superposition of unwanted harmonics of the waveform.
                                                                  PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION                25




FIGURE 2.2 Schematic diagram of the mechanism to generate PWM gating pulses for Q1
and Q4 .

   In Figure 2.1, PDC represents the (instantaneous) power at the DC side, Pt denotes
the power at the AC side, and Ps signiﬁes the power delivered to the AC-side voltage
source. The positive direction of the power ﬂow is deﬁned from the DC voltage
source(s) toward the AC-side voltage source, as indicated in Figure 2.1.


2.3     PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION

2.3.1    Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM)
The half-bridge converter operates based on the alternate switching of Q1 and
Q4 . The turn-on/off commands of Q1 and Q4 are issued through a pulse-width
modulation (PWM) strategy. The PWM can be carried out following numerous
techniques [24, 25]. However, the most common PWM strategy compares a high-
frequency periodic triangular waveform, the carrier signal,5 with a slow-varying
waveform known as the modulating signal. The carrier signal has a periodic waveform
with period Ts and swings between −1 and 1. The intersections of the carrier and the
modulating signals determine the switching instants of Q1 and Q4 . The PWM process
is illustrated in Figure 2.2, where the switching function of a switch is deﬁned as
                      
                          1,   if the switch is commanded to conduct,
             s(t) =
                          0,   if the switch is turned off.

Thus, as Figure 2.2 shows, when the modulating signal is larger than the carrier signal,
a turn-on command is issued for Q1 , and the turn-on command of Q4 is canceled.

5 The carrier signal can also be a periodic sawtooth waveform. However, a triangular carrier signal is often

used for a high-power converter.
26      DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




FIGURE 2.3 Signals based on PWM switching strategy: (a) carrier and modulating signals;
(b) switching function of the switch Q1 ; and (c) switching function of the switch Q4 .



Once the modulating signal is smaller than the carrier signal, the turn-on command
for Q1 is blocked while a turn-on command is issued for Q4 . It should be noted that a
switch does not necessarily conduct if it is commanded to turn on; the switch conducts
only if the turn-on command is provided and the current direction conforms to the
switch characteristics. For example, in response to a turn-on command, an IGBT
can conduct only if the current ﬂow is from the collector to the emitter. Figure 2.3(b)
and (c) illustrates the waveforms of the switching functions of Q1 and Q4 , based
on the PWM strategy of Figure 2.2. We note that s1 (t) + s4 (t) ≡ 1, as Figure 2.3
shows.


2.3.2    Converter Waveforms
In this section, we study the switching nature of the half-bridge converter of Figure 2.1,
based on the switching scheme introduced in Section 2.3.1. To avoid unnecessary
details, we make the following simplifying assumptions:

     r Each transistor or diode acts as a short circuit in its conduction state.
     r Each transistor or diode switch acts as an open circuit in its blocking state.
     r The transistors have no turn-off tailing current.
     r The diodes have no turn-off reverse recovery current.
                                                   CONVERTER SWITCHED MODEL             27

      r Transitions from a conduction state to a blocking state, and vice versa, take place
        instantly.
      r The AC-side current i is a ripple-free DC quantity.

   In the following subsections, we examine the converter switching waveforms on the
basis of the abovementioned assumptions. Since the converter operation is different
for positive and negative AC-side currents, we study each case separately.

2.3.2.1 Converter Waveforms for Positive AC-Side Current Consider the half-
bridge converter of Figure 2.1 with a positive AC-side current i. Assume that s1 = 0
and thus Q1 is blocked. Consequently, i cannot ﬂow through D1 , since iD1 can-
not be negative. For the same reason, Q4 does not carry i, although s4 = 1. There-
fore, i ﬂows through D4 and Vt = Vn = −VDC /2. Now consider a time instant at
which s1 = 1 and s4 = 0. In this case, Q1 conducts while Q4 is blocked. When
Q1 is on, we have Vt = Vp = VDC /2, and D4 is reverse biased. Therefore, i ﬂows
through Q1 .
   The waveforms of the half-bridge converter for positive i are illustrated in
Figure 2.4(a)–(h). As it follows from on the foregoing discussion, Q4 and D1 play no
role in the operation of the converter when i is positive. The fraction of the switching
period Ts during which s1 = 1 is called the duty ratio and denoted by d. Under the
simplifying assumptions of Section 2.3.2, d is also equal to the fraction of the switch-
ing period during which Vt = Vp = VDC /2; however, the latter is not the case if the
switching transients are taken into account.6

2.3.2.2 Converter Waveforms for Negative AC-Side Current It follows from a
similar analysis as presented for the case of positive i that Q1 and D4 do not take
part in the converter operation when i is negative. In this case, when s4 = 1, Q4
conducts and Vt = Vn = −VDC /2. Alternatively, when s4 = 0, the AC-side current
passes through D1 and Vt = Vp = VDC /2. The duty ratio, d, is deﬁned in the same
way as in the case of the positive AC-side current. Figure 2.5(a)–(h) illustrates the
waveforms of the half-bridge converter for negative i.


2.4     CONVERTER SWITCHED MODEL

To employ the half-bridge converter as a component of a larger system, we need
to identify the characteristics of the converter as observed from its terminals. The
switched model of the half-bridge converter introduces the relationships among the
converter terminal voltages and currents. A comparison between Figures 2.4 and 2.5
indicates that in a switch cell the waveform of the current through the transistor,
or that through the diode, depends on the direction of the converter AC-side current.
However, since ip = iQ1 − iD1 and in = −iQ4 + iD4 , the waveform of the switch cell

6 We will show this in Section 2.6.
28   DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




     FIGURE 2.4 Half-bridge converter waveforms for positive AC-side current.
                                         CONVERTER SWITCHED MODEL          29




FIGURE 2.5 Half-bridge converter waveforms for negative AC-side current.
30    DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




FIGURE 2.6 Half-bridge converter waveforms: (a) positive AC-side current; (b) negative
AC-side current.


current is independent of the polarity of i. More importantly, the waveform of the AC-
side terminal voltage Vt is independent of the polarity of i and is uniquely determined
by the switching functions. Hence, from the terminal viewpoint, the operation of the
half-bridge converter can be described as follows.
   When s1 = 1, the upper switch cell is closed and the lower one is open; therefore,
Vt = Vp = VDC /2, ip = i, and in = 0. Alternatively, when s4 = 1, the lower switch
cell is closed but the upper one is open; consequently, Vt = Vn = −VDC /2, ip = 0,
and in = i. This holds for both i > 0 and i < 0, as illustrated in Figure 2.6.
   It follows from the foregoing discussion that the half-bridge converter of
Figure 2.1 can be mathematically characterized by

                    s1 (t) + s4 (t) ≡ 1,                                          (2.1)
                    Vt (t) = (VDC /2) s1 (t) − (VDC /2) s4 (t),                   (2.2)
                                                        CONVERTER SWITCHED MODEL        31




   FIGURE 2.7 Switched equivalent circuit of the half-bridge converter of Figure 2.1.




                                    ip (t) = is1 (t),                              (2.3)
                                    in (t) = is4 (t).                              (2.4)

   Equations (2.1)–(2.4) describe the relationships between the half-bridge con-
verter terminal voltages/currents and the switching functions. Figure 2.7 illustrates
a switched equivalent circuit for the half-bridge converter of Figure 2.1, based on
(2.1)–(2.4).
   PDC , Pt , and Ps are calculated as

                                                VDC
               PDC (t) = Vp ip + Vn in =            [s1 (t) − s4 (t)] i,           (2.5)
                                                 2
                                    VDC
               Pt (t) = Vt (t)i =       [s1 (t) − s4 (t)] i,                       (2.6)
                                     2
               Ps (t) = Vs i.                                                      (2.7)

   The converter power loss is

                                Ploss = PDC − Pt .                                 (2.8)

   It then follows from (2.5) and (2.6) that Ploss ≡ 0, that is, the ideal half-bridge
converter is lossless.
32      DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


2.5    CONVERTER AVERAGED MODEL

Equations (2.1)–(2.7) provide a switched model for the half-bridge converter of
Figure 2.1. The switched model accurately describes the steady-state and dynamic
behavior of the converter. The accuracy can be enhanced if more elaborate models are
adopted for the circuit components, for example, switches. Thus, given the switch-
ing functions for the transistors, the instantaneous values of the current and voltage
variables can be computed by means of the switched model. Therefore, the computed
variables include high-frequency components, for example, due to the switching pro-
cess, as well as slow transients. However, the relationships between the modulating
signal—which is the main control variable—and the current/voltage variables are not
easily understood from the switched model. Moreover, for dynamic analysis and con-
trol design purposes, knowledge about the high-frequency details of variables is often
not necessary, as the compensators and ﬁlters in a closed-loop control system typi-
cally exhibit low-pass characteristics and do not react to high-frequency components.
For these reasons, we are often interested in the dynamics of the average values of
variables, rather than in the dynamics of the instantaneous values. An averaged model
also enables us to describe the converter dynamics as a function of the modulating
signal.
   Consider the switched equivalent circuit of the half-bridge converter, as shown in
Figure 2.7. The AC-side current, i, satisﬁes

                                     d
                                 L      i(t) + Ri(t) = Vt (t) − Vs .                                  (2.9)
                                     dt
Since Vt (t) is a periodic function with period Ts , it can be described by the following
Fourier series:

                           Ts                   
                                                h=+∞
                  1
         Vt (t) =                Vt (τ)dτ +            [ah cos(hωs t) + bh sin(hωs t)] ,             (2.10)
                  Ts       0                    h=1


where h is the harmonic order, ωs = 2π
                                    Ts , and ah and bh are given by

                                            Ts
                                    2
                               ah =               Vt (τ)cos(hωs τ)dτ,                                (2.11)
                                    Ts      0
                                            Ts
                                    2
                               bh =               Vt (τ)sin(hωs τ)dτ.                                (2.12)
                                    Ts      0

Substituting for Vt (t) from (2.10) in (2.9), we obtain
                          Ts                            
                                                          h=+∞
     di              1
L       + Ri =                   Vt (τ)dτ − Vs        +          [ah cos(hωs t) + bh sin(hωs t)] .
     dt              Ts    0                              h=1
                                                                                                     (2.13)
                                                          CONVERTER AVERAGED MODEL      33

Equation (2.13) describes a low-pass ﬁlter with the output i. The input to the ﬁlter
                                                                T
consists of two components, the constant (DC) component T1s 0 s Vt (τ)dτ − Vs and
                        
the periodic component h=+∞h=1 (ah cos(hωs t) + bh sin(hωs t)). Equation (2.13) is lin-
ear. Therefore, based on the superposition principle, the response of the ﬁlter to the
composite input can be regarded as the summation of its responses to individual input
components. This can be expressed as

                                   Ts
                  di        1
              L      + Ri =               Vt (τ)dτ − Vs ,                            (2.14)
                  dt        Ts        0

                  di         
                            h=+∞
              L      + Ri =      [ah cos(hωs t) + bh sin(hωs t)] ,                   (2.15)
                  dt
                                h=1

              i(t) = i(t) + i(t),                                                    (2.16)


where i(t) and i(t) are, respectively, the responses of the ﬁlter to the DC (low-
frequency) component and the periodic (high-frequency) component of the ﬁlter input.
We can also refer to i(t) as the ripple. According to (2.15), if ωs is adequately larger
than R/L, then the periodic component of the input has a negligible contribution to
the entire output, the ripple is small, and we can assume that i(t) ≈ i(t). Thus, the
dynamics of the converter system are primarily described by (2.14).
    To extend the foregoing methodology to cases where the average of a variable is
itself a function of time, that is, it changes from one switching cycle to the next, the
averaging operator is deﬁned as

                                                   t
                                             1
                                      x(t) =              x(τ)dτ,                    (2.17)
                                             Ts    t−Ts



where x(t) is a variable and the overbar denotes its average.7 Thus, (2.14) can also be
derived by applying the averaging operator (2.17) to both sides of (2.9). This concept
is known as averaging in nonlinear systems theory [28, 29] and the power electronics
literature [30, 31].
    As explained in Section 2.3.1, the periodic switched waveforms are generated by
a PWM process. Thus, it can be concluded from Figure 2.3 that if the modulating
waveform is not constant but varies in time, the switched waveforms s1 and s4 will not
retain their precisely periodic forms. Moreover, the average of the switched waveforms
varies from one switching cycle to another. The deﬁnition of the average, based on
(2.17), allows one to also include such switched waveforms in the averaging process. A
prerequisite for validity of (2.17) is that the frequency of the carrier waveform should
be sufﬁciently, for example, 10 times, larger than that of the modulating waveform.

7 Also known as the moving average.
34    DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


  Applying the averaging operator (2.17) to s1 (t) and s4 (t), in view of Figure 2.6,
one deduces

                               s1 (t) = d,
                               s4 (t) = 1 − d.                                  (2.18)

   Figure 2.8 shows that if the carrier frequency is adequately higher than that of the
modulating signal, i and V DC can be assumed as constant values over one switching
cycle [16, 26, 27]. Thus, taking averages of both sides of (2.2)–(2.8) and substituting
for s1 (t) and s4 (t) from (2.18) in the results, we obtain

                                        VDC
                                 Vt =       (2d − 1),                           (2.19)
                                         2
                                 ip = di,                                       (2.20)
                                  in = (1 − d)i,                                (2.21)
                                      VDC
                               P DC =     (2d − 1)i,                            (2.22)
                                       2
                                      VDC
                                 Pt =     (2d − 1)i,                            (2.23)
                                       2
                                 P s = Vs i,                                    (2.24)
                               P loss = P DC − P t ≡ 0.                         (2.25)

    The duty ratio d can assume any value between 0 and 1. If the PWM strategy of
Figure 2.2 is adopted, m = 2d − 1 describes the relationship between the magnitude
of the modulating signal and the duty ratio. This is highlighted in Figure 2.8, which
illustrates that d changes from 0 to 1 as m is changed from −1 to 1. It is implicitly
assumed that m is constant over the switching period.
    Substituting for d = (m + 1)/2 in (2.19)–(2.23), we obtain

                                      VDC
                               Vt = m     ,                                     (2.26)
                                       2
                                           
                                      1+m
                               ip =           i,                                (2.27)
                                       2
                                           
                                      1−m
                               in =           i,                                (2.28)
                                       2
                                             VDC
                               P DC = m          i,                             (2.29)
                                              2
                                        VDC
                               Pt = m       i.                                  (2.30)
                                         2
                                                CONVERTER AVERAGED MODEL             35




FIGURE 2.8 Generation of the switching signal with a desired duty ratio: if m is changed
from −1 to 1, d changes linearly from 0 to 1.


    The advantage of the change of variable d = (m + 1)/2 becomes evident in (2.26);
if m is changed from −1 to 1, the averaged AC-side terminal voltage V t changes lin-
early from −VDC /2 to VDC /2, with m = 0 corresponding to the zero averaged voltage.
Figure 2.9 illustrates the averaged equivalent circuit of the half-bridge converter of
Figure 2.1. In the following example, we study and compare the dynamic responses
of the half-bridge DC/AC converter deduced from the switched and averaged models.


   EXAMPLE 2.1          Dynamic Response of Half-Bridge Converter
   Consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 2.1. The system parameters are
   L = 690 ␮H, R = 5 m, VDC /2 = 600 V, Vs = 400 V, m = 0.68, and fs =
   1620 Hz (or equivalently Ts = 617 ␮s). Initially, the converter is in a steady
   state. Then, m is changed from 0.68 to 0.685, Vs is changed from 400 to 415 V,
36      DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




     FIGURE 2.9 Averaged equivalent circuit of the half-bridge converter of Figure 2.1.

     and VDC /2 is changed from 600 to 605 V, respectively, at t = 0.2 s, t = 0.7 s,
     and t = 1.5 s.
        Figures 2.10 and 2.11 illustrate the patterns of variation of the converter
     currents and powers, respectively. In each ﬁgure, columns (a) and (b) show
     the waveforms obtained from the switched model and the averaged model, re-




FIGURE 2.10 Transient behavior of the half-bridge converter AC- and DC-side currents,
Example 2.1: (a) switched model; (b) averaged model.
                                               CONVERTER AVERAGED MODEL               37




FIGURE 2.11 Transient behavior of the half-bridge converter powers, Example 2.1: (a)
switched model; (b) averaged model.


   spectively. As Figures 2.10 and 2.11 indicate, the averaged model accurately
   predicts the pattern of the converter dynamic behavior while it does not include
   the details of the switched waveforms, that is, the high-frequency components
   of the waveforms. To further highlight the accuracy of the averaged model,
   we have superimposed in Figure 2.12 the waveforms of i obtained from the
   switched and averaged models. Figure 2.12 illustrates that the waveform ob-
   tained from the averaged model is an average of that provided by the switched
   model.




FIGURE 2.12 Current waveforms obtained from the switched and averaged models of
Example 2.1.
38       DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


        It should be noted that although PDC and Pt are equal, Ps is slightly less
     (in absolute value) than both of them (Fig. 2.11). This difference is due to the
     power loss in R. Figure 2.11 also illustrates that powers can be both positive and
     negative since the half-bridge converter of Figure 2.1 is a bidirectional power
     processor.



2.6     NONIDEAL HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER

In the previous section, we analyzed the DC/AC half-bridge converter. In our analy-
sis, we employed idealized models for the switches. Based on simplifying assump-
tions, we also presented an averaged model for the half-bridge converter. In this
section, we extend the averaged model to represent a half-bridge converter whose
switches are nonideal. Thus, we employ more elaborate models for transistors and
diodes [16] and present a procedure to include the impacts of the intrinsic voltage
drops, resistances, and switching transients of the transistors and diodes. The method-
ology presented here is a generalization of that presented in Ref. [32]. In this section,
we assume the following:

      r In its conducting state, each electronic switch is modeled by a voltage drop in
        series with a resistance.
      r In its blocking state, each electronic switch is modeled by an open circuit.
      r The turn-on process of each transistor is instantaneous, but its turn-off process
        is subject to the tailing current phenomenon.
      r The turn-on process of each diode is instantaneous, but its turn-off process is
       subject to the reverse current recovery phenomenon.

     Figure 2.13 shows the schematic diagram of a half-bridge converter whose tran-
sistors and diodes are nonideal. Thus, for each switch, Vd and ron represent the cor-
responding on-state voltage drop and resistance, respectively. For the sake of clarity,
compared to the ideal half-bridge converter of Figure 2.1, we signify the AC-side
terminal voltage and the DC-side currents of the nonideal half-bridge converter by
Vt , ip , and in , respectively. Moreover, we denote the DC-side and the AC-side powers
by P1 and P2 , respectively. The following two subsections present and investigate the
converter switching waveforms.


2.6.1 Analysis of Nonideal Half-Bridge Converter: Positive AC-Side
Current
Let us consider one switching cycle of the operation of the half-bridge converter
of Figure 2.13; the switching cycle extends from t = 0 to t = Ts , where Ts is the
switching period. Figure 2.14(a) and (b), respectively, illustrates the waveforms cor-
responding to the switching functions of Q1 and Q4 . Let us assume that the AC-side
                                           NONIDEAL HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER              39




FIGURE 2.13 Simpliﬁed power circuit diagram of a half-bridge converter with nonideal
switches.



current i is positive and remains relatively constant during the switching cycle. At
t = 0− , Q1 is off and D4 conducts. At t = 0+ , Q1 is commanded to turn on and,
consequently, iQ1 increases. However, since iQ1 + iD4 = i, iD4 decreases. Once iQ1
is equal to i, iD4 becomes zero and the diode reverse recovery starts (Fig. 2.14(d) and
(e)). During the reverse recovery process, D4 still conducts and

                            Vt = Vn − ron iD4 − Vd .                              (2.31)

Since |Vn |  ron iD4 + Vd , Vt ≈ Vn = −VDC /2 during the reverse recovery interval,
as Figure 2.14(c) illustrates. The reverse recovery of D4 lasts for trr until the whole
reverse recovery charge of Qrr is removed from D4 . As Figure 2.14(d) and (e) shows,
during the reverse recovery process, iD4 is negative and iQ1 is larger than i.
   At t = trr , the reverse recovery charge is entirely removed and D4 stops conduction.
Hence, iD4 becomes zero and iQ1 becomes equal to i. Since the gating command of
Q1 is still in place at t = trr , Q1 enters the saturation mode. From t = trr to t = dTs ,
40    DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




FIGURE 2.14 Switching waveforms of nonideal half-bridge converter for positive AC-side
current.
                                                         NONIDEAL HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER                   41

Q1 carries i (Fig. 2.14(d)), and

                                       Vt = Vp − ron i − Vd .                                         (2.32)

Note that the term ron i + Vd is considerably smaller than Vp and therefore Vt ≈ Vp =
VDC /2, as Figure 2.14(c) indicates. At t = dTs , the gating command of Q1 is removed
and iQ1 rapidly drops to its tailing current level (Fig. 2.14(d)). Therefore, D4 starts
conducting, and iD4 increases rapidly (Fig. 2.14(e)). The tailing current process lasts
for ttc until the whole tailing current charge of Qtc is removed from the transistor.
During the tailing current process, the following equation holds:

                                Vt = Vn − ron iD4 − Vd
                                      = Vn − ron (i − iQ1 ) − Vd ,                                     (2.33)

and Vt ≈ −VDC /2 (Fig. 2.14(c)). At t = trr + dTs + ttc , iQ1 becomes zero and
iD4 = i, as Figure 2.14(e) illustrates. From t = dTs + ttc to Ts , the whole AC-side
current is carried by D4 , and we have

                                       Vt = Vn − ron i − Vd ,                                         (2.34)

and Vt ≈ −VDC /2, as Figure 2.14(c) shows.
   The average of the AC-side terminal voltage is
              Ts
        1
Vt =               Vt (τ)dτ
        Ts    0
                   trr               dTs               dTs +ttc               Ts
       1
     =                    Vt dτ +           Vt dτ +                Vt dτ +               Vt dτ ,   (2.35)
       Ts           0                 trr                dTs                     dTs +ttc


where Vt , for each time interval, is obtained from (2.31) to (2.34),
                                                                   t respectively. Sub-
stituting for Vt in (2.35), based on (2.31)–(2.34), knowing that 0rr iD4 (τ)dτ = −Qrr
      dT +t
and dTss tc iQ1 dτ = Qtc , and rearranging the result, we conclude that

                                             VDC
                                Vt = m          − V e − re i
                                              2
                                      = V t − Ve − re i,         for      i > 0,                       (2.36)

where V t = mVDC /2 based on (2.26), and
                                                                               
                                     Qrr + Qtc                                trr
                        Ve = Vd −                           ron + VDC              ,                   (2.37)
                                         Ts                                   Ts
                                     
                                  trr
                        re = 1 −        ron .                                                          (2.38)
                                  Ts
42        DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


Equation (2.36) indicates that the average terminal voltage Vt can be controlled by
m. However, a comparison between (2.36) and (2.26) reveals that, compared to the
ideal converter, the AC-side terminal voltage of the nonideal converter Vt includes
two parasitic terms in addition to m(VDC /2): the effective voltage offset Ve and the
effective resistive voltage drop re i.
   Since P1 = (VDC /2)(ip − in ), ip = iQ1 , and in = iD4 , the averaged DC-side
power is

                           Ts                         Ts
                     1                          VDC
            P1 =                   P1 (τ)dτ =                [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ.                      (2.39)
                     Ts    0                    2Ts    0


The right-hand side integral of (2.39) can be expanded as

                       trr                                   dTs
                VDC
 P1 =                                [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ +            [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ
                2Ts            0                                 trr
                           dTs +ttc                                   Ts
                    VDC
            +                              [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ +                     [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ .
                    2Ts            dTs                                      dTs +ttc

                                                                                                         (2.40)

Each integral in (2.40) is equal to the area captured between the waveform iQ1 (t) −
iD4 (t) and the time axis, within the integral limits. As Figure 2.14(d) and (e) suggests,
the integrals are calculated as
 trr
        [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ = (itrr + Qrr ) − (−Qrr ) = itrr + 2Qrr ,                                  (2.41)
 0
 dTs
        [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ = (idTs − itrr ) − (0) = idTs − itrr ,                                     (2.42)
 trr
 dTs +ttc
             [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ = (Qtc ) − (ittc − Qtc ) = 2Qtc − ittc ,                              (2.43)
 dTs
 Ts
            [iQ1 (τ) − iD4 (τ)]dτ = (0) − (iTs − idTs − ittc ) = −iTs + idTs + ittc . (2.44)
 dTs +ttc


Substituting for the integrals (2.41)–(2.44) in (2.40), we obtain
                                                                                   
             VDC                     Qrr + Qtc                              Qrr + Qtc
P1 = m           i +VDC                              = P DC + VDC                       ,         for   i > 0.
             2                        Ts                                     Ts
            P DC

                                                                                                         (2.45)
                                                  NONIDEAL HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER                  43

Based on (2.36), we obtain the average of the AC-side terminal power as

                      VDC
    P 2 = Vt i = m       i −Ve i − re i2 = P t − Ve i − re i2 ,           for     i > 0.     (2.46)
                       2
                       
                      Pt


As (2.29) and (2.30) indicate, P DC = P t = m(VDC /2)i. Therefore, based on (2.45)
and (2.46), the power loss P loss = P 1 − P 2 is
                                           
                               Qrr + Qtc
          P loss = VDC                          + Ve i + re i2 ,     for   i > 0,             (2.47)
                                   Ts

which is nonzero, as expected.

2.6.2   Analysis of Nonideal Converter: Negative AC-Side Current
For the case where the AC-side current i is negative, the half-bridge converter of
Figure 2.13 is analyzed in a way similar to that for the positive AC-side current case.
In this case, iD1 and iQ4 are involved in the converter operation, and based on the
directions of Figure 2.13, ip = −iD1 and in = −iQ4 .
   Figure 2.15(a)–(e) illustrates the converter switching waveforms. From t = 0 to
t = ttc , Q4 is turning off with the tailing current. From t = ttc to t = dTs , Q4 is off,
and D1 carries the current. From t = dTs to t = dTs + trr , Q4 is turning on and D1
is undergoing the reverse recovery process. From t = dTs + trr to t = Ts , D1 is off
and Q4 carries the current. The following equations describe the AC-side terminal
voltage over each aforementioned time interval:

Vt = Vp + ron iD1 + Vd = Vp + ron (−i − iQ4 ) + Vd                   over       0 < t < ttc , (2.48)
Vt = Vp − ron i + Vd            over        ttc < t < dTs ,                                  (2.49)
Vt = Vp + ron iD1 + Vd          over        dTs < t < dTs + trr ,                            (2.50)
Vt = Vn − ron i + Vd            over        dTs + trr < t < Ts .                             (2.51)
                                   t                     dT +t
Based on (2.48)–(2.51), and since 0tc iQ4 (τ)dτ = Qtc and dTss rr iD1 dτ = −Qrr ,
the average of the AC-side terminal voltage is

                       Vt = V t + Ve − re i,          for   i < 0,                           (2.52)

where V t = mVDC /2, and Ve and re are deﬁned by (2.37) and (2.38), respectively.
   We calculate the averaged DC-side and AC-side powers following the same steps
as those taken for the case of positive AC-side current. Thus,
                                                     
                                            Qrr + Qtc
              P 1 = P DC + VDC                         ,       for    i < 0,                  (2.53)
                                                Ts
44    DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




FIGURE 2.15 Switching waveforms of nonideal half-bridge converter for negative AC-side
current.
                                               NONIDEAL HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER                45

which is identical to (2.45), and

                         P 2 = P t + V e i − r e i2 ,     for     i < 0.                  (2.54)

Based on (2.29) and (2.30), P DC = P t = m(VDC /2)i. Therefore, based on (2.53) and
(2.54), the converter power loss is
                                                 
                                     Qrr + Qtc
    P loss = P 1 − P 2 = VDC                          − V e i + r e i2 ,   for   i < 0.   (2.55)
                                         Ts

2.6.3   Averaged Model of Nonideal Half-Bridge Converter
Equations (2.36) and (2.52) provide expressions for the averaged values of the AC-
side terminal voltage of the nonideal half-bridge converter for positive and negative
AC-side currents, respectively. The two equations can be expressed in a uniﬁed form
as

                                        i
                        Vt = V t −        Ve − re i,      i=
                                                            / 0,                          (2.56)
                                       |i|

where | · | denotes the absolute value function, and Ve and re are given by (2.37)
and (2.38), respectively. Similarly, (2.46) and (2.54) can be combined to express the
averaged AC-side terminal power of the nonideal converter as

                             P 2 = P t − Ve |i| − re i2 .                                 (2.57)

The averaged DC-side power of the nonideal converter is described by (2.45) and
(2.53) as
                                                               
                                                  Qrr + Qtc
                      P 1 = P DC + VDC                              .                     (2.58)
                                                      Ts

   As (2.56)–(2.58) indicate, the expressions of the terminal voltage and powers of
the nonideal converter possess additional terms compared to their counterparts in the
ideal converter, that is, V t , P t , and P DC . These additional terms represent the impacts
of nonideal characteristics of the switches on the averaged model. Thus, to develop
an averaged model for the nonideal converter, one can augment the ideal averaged
model of Figure 2.9 with additional components that represent the nonidealities. The
augmented circuit model is illustrated in Figure 2.16.
   Figure 2.16 shows that the averaged AC-side terminal voltage of the nonideal
converter is a superposition of three components: (i) the averaged AC-side terminal
voltage of the ideal converter, that is, V t ; (ii) a current-dependent voltage source;
and (iii) a resistive voltage drop. V t can be linearly controlled by m, according to
Figure 2.9. However, the current-dependent voltage (i/|i|)Ve is added to or subtracted
from V t , depending on the polarity of i. The resistive voltage drop is represented by
46     DC/AC HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER




FIGURE 2.16 Averaged equivalent circuit of the nonideal half-bridge converter of Fig-
ure 2.13.

the resistor re , which, for analysis or control design purposes, may be considered as
a part of the resistance of the interface reactor. Figure 2.16 also shows that the DC
side of the nonideal half-bridge converter can be modeled by an independent current
source that is paralleled with the DC side of the corresponding ideal converter. The
independent current source represents the term VDC (Qrr + Qtc )/Ts of (2.58). Based
on (2.57) and (2.58), and since P DC = P t , the converter power loss is
                                             
                                   Qrr + Qtc
                   P loss = VDC                  + Ve |i| + re i2 .             (2.59)
                                       Ts

As Figure 2.16 illustrates, the DC-side terminal currents of the nonideal converter are

                                         
                                    1+m            Qrr + Qtc
                        ip =                 i+             ,                    (2.60)
                                     2                 Ts
                                         
                                    1−m            Qrr + Qtc
                        in =                 i−             .                    (2.61)
                                     2                 Ts

    The averaged circuit model of Figure 2.16 can be simpliﬁed to that of Figure 2.17,
based on the following considerations.
    As Figure 2.16 shows, the effective resistance re is in series and can be lumped with
the resistance R. On the other hand, trr is typically much smaller than Ts and, based
on (2.38), re can be approximated by ron . Therefore, re can be omitted from the aver-
aged model of Figure 2.16 and combined with the resistance of the interface reactor.
Figure 2.16 also suggests that the internal (averaged) AC voltage of the nonideal con-
verter can be approximately expressed by V t = mVDC /2; that is, the impact of the
current-dependent voltage (i/|i|)Ve can be ignored. The justiﬁcations are as follows:
(i) in a properly designed converter, V t = mVDC /2 is typically much larger than Ve
                                            NONIDEAL HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER           47




FIGURE 2.17 Simpliﬁed averaged equivalent circuit for the nonideal half-bridge converter
of Figure 2.13.


and (ii) practically, m is determined by a closed-loop control scheme whose function
is to regulate i.
    It should be noted that the above-mentioned approximations render the simpliﬁed
averaged circuit model of Figure 2.17 adequately accurate for dynamic analysis and
control design tasks. However, for estimation of the converter power loss, (2.59)
should still be used to achieve a higher accuracy. Example 2.2 provides a sense of
typical numerical values and their relative signiﬁcance.

   EXAMPLE 2.2           Half-Bridge Converter with Nonideal Elements
   Consider the half-bridge converter of Example 2.1, with the parameters ron =
   0.88 m, Vd = 0.94 V, trr = ttc = 0.96 ␮s, and Qrr = Qtc = 135 ␮C.8 On
   the basis of (2.37) and (2.38), we calculate Ve = 2.8 V and re = 0.879 m.
   Assuming m = 0.68, we calculate mVDC /2 = 408 V, which is about 145
   times Ve .
      Let us assume that the AC-side current is regulated at i = 1300 A. Then,
   based on (2.59) we ﬁnd the converter power loss to be about 5650 W, of which
   VDC (Qrr + Qtc )/Ts = 525 W, that is, less than 10%, is the no-load power loss
   and does not depend on i. However, the remaining 90%, that is, Ve |i| + re i2 =
   5125 W, is a quadratic function of i. Therefore, to achieve a higher efﬁciency
   under the rated load condition, a lower AC-side current at a higher DC-side
   voltage should be adopted.




8 A 1200 V/1200 A IGBT switch, FF1200R12KE3 from EUPEC, is considered.
3 Control of Half-Bridge Converter
3.1   INTRODUCTION

Chapter 2 introduced the four-quadrant DC/AC half-bridge converter and developed
its dynamic model based on the averaging method. The half-bridge converter serves as
a building block for the three-phase DC/AC voltage-sourced converter (VSC). There-
fore, a clear understanding of the dynamics and control of the half-bridge converter is
essential to a comprehensive treatment of the dynamics and control of a three-phase
VSC system.
    This chapter employs the averaged dynamic model developed in the previous
chapter to study the control of the half-bridge converter. We introduce the structure
of the controller, review the frequency-response approach to the controller design,
and identify the controller requirements to ensure quality command following and
disturbance rejection properties. Furthermore, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the
feed-forward compensation technique in mitigating the dynamic couplings between
the half-bridge converter and the AC system, improving the start-up transient of the
converter system, and enhancing the disturbance rejection capability of the converter
system. The insight gained from this chapter will be used in subsequent chapters for
the control of the three-phase VSC.



3.2   AC-SIDE CONTROL MODEL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER

Hereinafter, for the sake of compactness, the overbar is dropped from the averaged
variables throughout the rest of the book. However, we shall remember that the
averaging operator is applied to variables, over one switching cycle, unless other-
wise stated.
   Consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 2.13, duplicated as Figure 3.1 for
ease of reference. Based on the converter averaged equivalent circuit (Fig. 2.17), the
dynamics of the AC-side current i are described by

                                    di
                                L      + (R + ron )i = Vt − Vs ,                       (3.1)
                                    dt



Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

48
                        AC-SIDE CONTROL MODEL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER                 49


                    Vp = VDC /2
                          p
             i′p
                             iQ1         D1
                            Q1          − V
                                        + d
 VDC /2
                            Vd +
                               −           ron
       +
       −                    ron            iD1

                              i′p    V′t                                        Vs
                                             i           R       L        Vs
        0                                                                      +




                                                                                   −
            P1                i′n
                                                 P2                  Ps
 VDC /2
                             iQ4         D4
       +
       −                    Q4          − V
                                        + d
                            Vd +
                               −           ron
                            ron            iD4
             i′n
                          n
                   Vn = −VDC /2
              FIGURE 3.1 Schematic diagram of the half-bridge converter.




where

                                             VDC
                                      Vt =       m.                                  (3.2)
                                              2

Equation (3.1) represents a system in which i is the state variable, Vt is the control
input, and Vs is the disturbance input. The output of the system can, for example, be the
power exchanged with the AC-side voltage source, that is, Ps = Vs i. Based on (3.2),
the control input Vt is proportional to, and can be controlled by, the modulating signal
m. Figure 3.2 shows a control block diagram of the system described by (3.1) and
(3.2), for which the next section presents a closed-loop control structure to regulate i
at its reference value.
50      CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


                                           Vs



                              Vt            -                         1
 m                 ×                                                                                i
                                                             Ls + (R + ron )



                   VDC
                   2
           FIGURE 3.2 Control model of the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1.



3.3     CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER

Consider the open-loop system of Figure 3.2 in which the current i is the output and
the control objective is to regulate i at a prespeciﬁed reference value. This can be
achieved via the closed-loop system of Figure 3.3 in which the reference command
iref is compared with i, and the error signal e is generated. Then, the compensator
K(s) processes e and provides the control signal u. Then, u is divided by VDC /2
to compensate for the converter voltage gain, as described by (3.2). If the DC-side
voltage is constant, the numerical value of VDC /2 is known in advance and the gain
compensation becomes trivial. However, if the DC-side voltage is subject to variations,
VDC must be measured, for example, by a Hall-effect voltage transducer, to enable the
gain compensation that can be regarded as a feed-forward compensation. The output
of the controller must be limited prior to being delivered to the converter pulse-width
modulation (PWM) signal generator, to ensure that |m| ≤ 1.
    Depending on the type of the reference signal and the desired performance, dif-
ferent types of compensator may be used for the control. For example, if iref is a

                                                                           Vs
                              Controller
                                                                            Half-bridge converter
                   Compensator                  Saturation
               e                   u                   1     m        Vt    −         1
 iref                  K(s)                                       x                                 i
           −                                    -1                              Ls + (R+ ron)


                                       VDC                       VDC
                                        2                         2

     FIGURE 3.3 Control block diagram of the closed-loop half-bridge converter system.
                                           CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER              51

step function and Vs is a DC voltage, a proportional-integral (PI) compensator of the
generic form K(s) = (kp s + ki )/s is sufﬁcient for the control. The integral term of
the compensator guarantees that i tracks iref , with zero steady-state error, in spite of
the disturbance Vs .
   As understood from Figure 3.3, if K(s) = (kp s + ki )/s, the control system loop
gain is
                                                   ⎛               ⎞
                                                      s + kkpi
                                          kp       ⎝               ⎠.
                             (s) =                                                 (3.3)
                                          Ls           s + R+r
                                                            L
                                                              on




Based on the block diagrams of Figures 3.2 and 3.3, the open-loop half-bridge con-
verter has a stable pole at p = −(R + ron )/L. Typically, this pole is fairly close to
the origin and corresponds to a slow natural response. To improve the open-loop
frequency response, the pole can be canceled by the zero of the PI compensator.
Thus, choosing ki /kp = (R + ron )/L and kp /L = 1/τi , where τi is the desired time
constant of the closed-loop system, one obtains the closed-loop transfer function

                                            i(s)         1
                              Gi (s) =             =          ,                     (3.4)
                                          iref (s)   τi s + 1

which is a ﬁrst-order transfer function with the unity gain. τi should be made small
for a fast current-control response, but adequately large such that 1/τi , that is, the
bandwidth of the closed-loop control system, is considerably smaller, for example,
10 times smaller, than the switching frequency of the half-bridge converter (expressed
in rad/s). Depending on the requirements of a speciﬁc application and the converter
switching frequency, τi is typically selected in the range of 0.5–5 ms.
   Example 3.1 illustrates the performance of the current-controlled half-bridge con-
verter in tracking a step command.

   EXAMPLE 3.1          Closed-Loop Response of the Half-Bridge Converter
   Consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1 with parameters L = 690 ␮H,
   R = 5 m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC /2 = 600 V, Vs = 400 V, and
   fs = 1620 Hz. To achieve a closed-loop time constant of 5 ms, the compensator
   parameters are chosen as kp = 0.138  and ki = 1.176 /s.
       Initially, the half-bridge converter system is in a steady state and i = 0. The
   current command, iref , is ﬁrst changed from 0 to 1000 A, at t = 0.1 s, and then
   changed from 1000 to −1000 A, at t = 0.2 s. These correspond to changes in
   the AC-side power from 0 to 400 kW and from 400 to −400 kW, respectively.
   Figure 3.4(a)–(d) shows the half-bridge converter response to the step changes
   in iref . Figure 3.4(a) shows the compensator response to the command changes.
   The response of the compensator output u is equivalent to that of the AC-side
   terminal voltage Vt , required for the command tracking. u is then translated into
   the modulating waveform m (Fig. 3.4(b)), which is rendered to the converter
   PWM scheme. As expected, the step response of i is a ﬁrst-order exponential
52             CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


               600
               500 (a)
               400
        u(V)

               300
               200
               100

                  1
                0.8 (b)
                0.6
         m




                0.4
                0.2
                  0
          1500
          1000 (c)                                                                  iref
           500
 i(A)




             0                                                                      i
          −500
         −1000
         −1500

                400 (d)
     Ps (kW)




                200
                  0
               −200
               −400
                  0.05        0.1            0.15              0.2             0.25
                                                time (s)
FIGURE 3.4 Closed-loop response of the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1 to current
reference changes; Example 3.1.

     signal that settles at its ﬁnal level of 1000 A in less than 25 ms (Fig. 3.4(c)).
     Since Vs is constant, the power delivered to the AC-side voltage source Ps has
     the same pattern of variations as that of i (Fig. 3.4(d)). Thus, Ps can be rapidly
     controlled through the current control process.
         The closed-loop response illustrated in Figure 3.4 was obtained following
     a steady-state regime. In practice, however, the converter system starts from
     a zero-state condition. Figure 3.5 illustrates the start-up response of the half-
     bridge converter system, based on the following sequence of events. Initially,
     iref is set to zero, and Vs is equal to 400 V. However, the gating signals of both
     Q1 and Q2 are blocked and, therefore, i is zero. At t = 0.1 s, the gating signals
     are unblocked and the PWM is exercised.
         Figure 3.5(a) shows that subsequent to the activation of the control, i under-
     goes a large undershoot before coming back to zero. This response, certainly
     not desirable due to the additional stress it imposes on the converter, can be
     explained by the block diagram of Figure 3.3. When the gating signals are ac-
     tivated, the half-bridge converter generates an AC-side terminal voltage that is
     equal to the output of the compensator, u. Since the system is initially in the
     zero-state condition, u starts from zero (Fig. 3.5(b)), and so does Vt . However, Vs
     has a positive value at all times. Consequently, i becomes negative immediately
     after the controller activation, until the compensator regulates it back to zero.
                                                                          FEED-FORWARD COMPENSATION                        53

               1000
                         (a)
                   0
  i(A)



           −1000
           −2000                                                                                                    iref
                                                                                                                    i
           −3000

                600
                         (b)
                400
        u(V)




                200
                  0
               −100
                   0           0.1    0.2       0.3        0.4            0.5       0.6         0.7    0.8     0.9         1
                                                                 time (s)
  FIGURE 3.5 Start-up response of the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1; Example 3.1.


3.4        FEED-FORWARD COMPENSATION

3.4.1          Impact on Start-Up Transient
The undesirable start-up transient of Figure 3.5 can be avoided if the control scheme
of Figure 3.3 is augmented with a feed-forward compensation scheme, as shown
in Figure 3.6. The feed-forward scheme augments the compensator output with a
measure of Vs . This measure, denoted by V̆s , can be obtained from a voltage transducer
whose (dynamic) gain is Gff (s), where Gff (0) = 1. Therefore, at the start-up instant
when the compensator output is zero, the AC-side terminal voltage to be generated
starts from a value equal to Vs , and the AC-side current remains at zero.
   Example 3.2 illustrates the effectiveness of the feed-forward compensation in elim-
inating the start-up transient observed in Figure 3.5.


                                                       Feed-forward
                                                           filter                               Vs
                                                      Vs
                                                            Gff (s)

               Controller
                                                                                                  Half-bridge converter
                         Compensator                    Saturation
                                                                                                  –
 iref                e                      u                         1
                                                                                m          Vt              1
                               K(s)                                                   x                                        i
                 −                                         −1                                         Ls +(R+ron)


                                                 VDC                                 VDC
                                                  2                                   2

FIGURE 3.6 Control block diagram of the half-bridge converter with feed-forward compen-
sation.
54          CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


            1000
                       (a)
               0
 i(A)



        −1000
        −2000                                                                      iref
                                                                                   i
        −3000

             600
                       (b)
             400
     u(V)




             200
               0
            −100
                   0         0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9        1
                                                     time (s)

FIGURE 3.7 Start-up response of the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1 with feed-forward
compensation; Example 3.2.



     EXAMPLE 3.2     Start-Up Transient of the Half-Bridge Converter with
     Feed-Forward Compensation
     Figure 3.7 illustrates the start-up transient of the half-bridge converter of Exam-
     ple 3.1 for which the feed-forward compensation, with Gff (s) = 1, is employed.
     Figure 3.7(a) shows that the output current i stays at zero following the unblock-
     ing of the gating pulses. The reason is that, as Figure 3.7(b) shows, the initial
     value of u is equal to Vs through the feed-forward compensation signal path.
     Therefore, Vt = Vs , the voltage across the series RL interface reactor equals
     zero, and thus no current excursion is experienced.



3.4.2 Impact on Dynamic Coupling Between Converter System and AC
System
The beneﬁt of the feed-forward compensation is not restricted to improving the con-
verter start-up transients. The feed-forward compensation can also decouple dynamics
of the converter system from those of the AC system with which the converter sys-
tem is interfaced. For example, consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1 in
which the ideal AC-side voltage source Vs is more realistically represented by an AC
system, as shown in Figure 3.8. The AC system can be described by the state-space
equations

                                           ẋ = f (x, r, i, t),
                                           Vs = g(x, r, i, t),                        (3.5)
                                                    FEED-FORWARD COMPENSATION           55

                  Vp = VDC /2
                        p
            i′p


                                      −
VDC /2  +                         +   +
                                  −
        −
                                                                      AC system

                            i′p       V′t       R      L     Vs i
       0                                    i




                                                                                   +
                                                                                   −
                         i′n
            P1                         P2               Ps
VDC /2  +
        −
                                      −
                                  +   +
                                  −




            i′n
                        n
              Vn = −VDC /2

FIGURE 3.8 Schematic diagram of the half-bridge converter interfaced with an AC system.


where x and r denote vectors of the state variables and the AC system voltage/current
sources, respectively; f ( · ) and g( · ) are, in general, nonlinear functions of their
arguments.
    Let us assume that the control objective is to regulate i at iref , according to the
control block diagram of Figure 3.9. Without the feed-forward compensation, that
is, Gff (s) ≡ 0, the compensator design must take into account dynamics of the AC
system described by (3.5). The dynamics may be uncertain, time varying, nonlinear,
and of a high order. Therefore, the compensator design would be laborious and may
not be straightforward. Moreover, the impact of the AC system transients on the
control cannot be readily mitigated. However, if the feed-forward compensation is
employed, a prior knowledge of the AC system dynamics is not essential for the
controller design. The reason is that the dynamics of the half-bridge converter system
become effectively decoupled from those of the AC system if Gff (s) ≈ 1 in the
range of frequencies over which the AC system modes have considerable energy. As
Figure 3.9 illustrates, if V̆s ≈ Vs , the voltage difference across the series RL interface
reactor is determined exclusively by the PI compensator.
56       CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


                                       Feed-forward                             AC system
                                           filter                           .
                                                                            x = f (x,
                                       Vs                            Vs            – –r, i, t)
                                             Gff (s)
                                                                           Vs = g(x,
                                                                                  – –r, i, t)

        Controller
                                                                     Half-bridge converter
                   Compensator             Saturation
               e                 u                 1    m       Vt   −          1
 iref                 K(s)                                  x                                    i
           −                                −1                            Ls + (R+ron)


                                     VDC                    VDC
                                      2                      2

        FIGURE 3.9 Control block diagram of the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.8.



   Example 3.3 highlights the effectiveness of the feed-forward compensation in
mitigating dynamic interactions between the AC system and the half-bridge converter
system.

     EXAMPLE 3.3     Decoupling from AC System Dynamics by Feed-
     Forward Compensation
     Consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.10 with parameters L = 450 ␮H,
     R = 5 m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC /2 = 600 V, and fs = 3780 Hz.
     The AC system parameters are Vth = 400 V, Lf = 250 ␮H, Cf = 2500 ␮F,
     and Rf = 50 . The compensator parameters are set as kp = 0.15  and ki =
     1.96 /s.
         Figure 3.11 shows the response of the closed-loop system to a 1000-A step
     change in iref when no feed-forward compensation is employed. Figure 3.11(a)
     indicates that subsequent to the command change, Vs experiences low-
     frequency oscillations due to poorly damped oscillatory modes of the AC
     system. The oscillations lead to a poor transient response of i (Fig. 3.11(b)).
         Figure 3.12 shows the response of the system to the same current command,
     however, when the feed-forward compensator is in service. The transfer func-
     tion of the feed-forward ﬁlter is Gff (s) = 1/(8 × 10−6 s + 1). Figure 3.12(b)
     shows that in spite of the oscillations of Vs , observed in Figure 3.12(a), the
     response of i to iref is a ﬁrst-order exponential function with a time constant
     of 3 ms.
         A comparison between Figures 3.12(a) and 3.11(a) highlights the impact
     of the feed-forward compensation on Vs . Figure 3.12(a) shows that the oscil-
     lations of Vs decay relatively slowly when the feed-forward compensation is
     employed. The reason is that, under the feed-forward compensation, the con-
     verter system is equivalent to an independent current source as viewed by the AC
     system. Consequently, damping of the AC system modes corresponding to the
     eigenvalues λ1,2 ≃ −4 ± 1256j is left only to the resistance Rf . However,
     when the feed-forward compensation is disabled, the dynamics of the AC
                                                  FEED-FORWARD COMPENSATION              57


                  Vp = VDC /2
                        p
            i′p



VDC /2                              −
        +                       +   +
                                −
        −
                                                                        AC system

                          i′p       V′t               L      Vs i            Lf    Vth
        0                                 i   R




                                                                                  +
                                                                                  −
                          i′n
                                                                 Cf          Rf
VDC /2  +                                               Ps
        −                                                                0
                                    −
                                +   +
                                −




            i′n
                         n
                  Vn = −VDC /2

                    FIGURE 3.10 Half-bridge converter of Example 3.3.




   system interact through the feedback loop with those of the compensator and
   the converter. Thus, the modes corresponding to the AC system are relocated
   with respect to their initial location and assume different natural frequencies and
   damping ratios. It is thus expected that due to the converter loss and the damping
   of the compensator modes, the closed-loop modes have higher damping ratios
   than the open-loop modes, as Figure 3.11(a) suggests.


3.4.3   Impact on Disturbance Rejection Capability
The feed-forward compensation can also enhance the disturbance rejection capability
of the closed-loop converter system. Example 3.4 illustrates that, if the feed-forward
ﬁlter Gff (s) in Figure 3.6 has an adequately large bandwidth, the transient impact of
Vs on i in the converter system of Figure 3.1 is noticeably mitigated.
58             CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


               600
                     (a)
               500
     Vs (V)




               400

               300

          1200
          1000 (b)
           800
 i (A)




           600
           400                                                                   iref
           200
             0                                                                   i
             0.09          0.1   0.11   0.12    0.13       0.14   0.15    0.16          0.17
                                               time (s)
FIGURE 3.11 Transient response of the converter system with no feed-forward compensa-
tion; Example 3.3.


      EXAMPLE 3.4      Disturbance Rejection of the Half-Bridge Converter
      with Feed-Forward Compensation
      Consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1 with parameters L = 690 ␮H,
      R = 5 m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC /2 = 600 V, Vs = 400 V, and
      fs = 1620 Hz. The compensator parameters are kp = 0.138  and ki = 1.176
      /s. The closed-loop half-bridge converter system is initially in a steady state
      and i = 1000 A. At t = 0.1 and t = 0.2 s, Vs is subjected to step changes from


               600
                     (a)
               500
      Vs (V)




               400

               300

          1200
          1000 (b)
           800
 i (A)




           600
           400                                                                   iref
           200
             0                                                                   i
             0.09          0.1   0.11   0.12    0.13       0.14   0.15    0.16          0.17
                                                time (s)
FIGURE 3.12 Transient response of the converter system with the feed-forward compensa-
tion in service; Example 3.3.
                                              SINUSOIDAL COMMAND FOLLOWING                 59

              500
                    (a)
              450
      u (V)


              400
              350
              300

          1600
          1400 (b)                                                                iref
                                                                                  i
  i (A)




          1200
          1000
           800
           600
              0    0.1    0.2   0.3     0.4     0.5      0.6   0.7     0.8    0.9        1
                                              time (s)
FIGURE 3.13 Disturbance rejection of the system when no feed-forward compensation is
employed; Example 3.4.


   400 to 450 V and from 450 to 350 V, respectively, while iref is kept constant at
   1000 A.
      Figure 3.13 shows the response of the half-bridge converter to the distur-
   bances when the feed-forward scheme is not in service and the control effort u
   is merely determined based on the reaction of the PI compensator to the error
   signal. Thus, since the error signal does not change until there is a discrepancy
   between iref and i, the corrective response of u to the disturbances is fairly slow
   (Fig. 3.13(a)), and consequently, i diverts from iref due to the changes in Vs ,
   as Figure 3.13(b) illustrates. In the steady state, i settles at iref (Fig. 3.13(b)).
   Figure 3.14 shows the response of the half-bridge converter to the same distur-
   bances when the feed-forward scheme is enabled. The transfer function of the
   feed-forward ﬁlter is Gff (s) = 1/(0.0005s + 1). In this case, when Vs changes,
   u reacts rapidly via the feed-forward signal path (Fig. 3.14(a)). Therefore, the
   impact of the disturbances on i is counteracted and effectively mitigated, as
   Figure 3.14(b) shows. Similar to the previous case, the error becomes zero in
   the steady state.



3.5       SINUSOIDAL COMMAND FOLLOWING

In subsequent chapters, the half-bridge converter is employed as the main building
block of three-phase VSC systems, in which the sinusoidal command following is a
typical requirement. As such, it is warranted to evaluate the capability of the half-
bridge converter in tracking a sinusoidal current command.
   Consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1 with the closed-loop control block
diagram of Figure 3.6. Assume that Vs is a sinusoidal function of time with the angular
60           CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


             500
                   (a)
             450
     u (V)


             400
             350
             300

          1600
          1400 (b)                                                                 iref
                                                                                   i
  i (A)




          1200
          1000
           800
           600
              0    0.1    0.2      0.3     0.4       0.5    0.6      0.7   0.8   0.9       1
                                                 time (s)
FIGURE 3.14 Disturbance rejection of the system with feed-forward compensation in
service; Example 3.4.


frequency ω0 , corresponding to a power line frequency of 50 or 60 Hz. Also assume
that there is a need to track a sinusoidal current command characterized by

                                iref (t) = 
                                           I cos(ω0 t + φ)unit(t),                        (3.6)

where I and φ are the amplitude and the initial phase angle of the sinusoidal command,
respectively, and unit(t) is the unit step function. Then, if the closed-loop transfer
function of the converter system is given by (3.4), the steady-state response of i to
the command has the form

                                         
                                         I
                          i(t) =                    cos(ω0 t + φ + δ),                   (3.7)
                                     1 + (τi ω0 )2

where the phase shift δ is given by

                                      δ = − tan−1 (τi ω0 ).                               (3.8)

Equations (3.7) and (3.8) suggest that if the PI compensator of Section 3.3 is employed,
i tracks iref with errors in both the amplitude andthe phase angle. According to (3.7),
the amplitude of i is inversely proportional to 1 + (τi ω0 )2 and, therefore, smaller
than I. In addition, as (3.8) indicates, i lags iref by an angle that can be signiﬁcant
depending on the product τi ω0 .
    The capability of the closed-loop system to faithfully track a sinusoidal command
depends on the system closed-loop bandwidth. The bandwidth of the closed-loop sys-
tem of (3.4) is equal to 1/τi . Therefore, a sinusoidal command can be followed with
negligible attenuation or phase delay if τi is adequately small. However, selection of
                                                                SINUSOIDAL COMMAND FOLLOWING      61

a very small closed-loop time constant may not be possible due to practical limita-
tions/requirements. For example, while a closed-loop current controller with a time
constant of τi = 2 ms is considered as being reasonably fast for most high-power con-
verter systems, it tracks a 60 Hz sinusoidal command with an amplitude attenuation
of 20% and a phase delay of 37◦ .
   Example 3.5 illustrates the sinusoidal command following performance of the
half-bridge converter system if a PI compensator is used.

        EXAMPLE 3.5                       Sinusoidal Command Following with PI Compensator
        Consider the half-bridge converter of Figure 3.1, in conjunction with the control
        scheme of Figure 3.6, with the following parameters: L = 690 ␮H, R = 5
        m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC /2 = 600 V, and fs = 3420 Hz. The
        compensator parameters are kp = 0.345  and ki = 2.94 /s, which correspond
        to τi = 2ms. The transfer function of the feed-forward ﬁlter is Gff (s) = 1/(8 ×
        10−6 s + 1).
            Let us assume that Vs = 400 cos(377t − π2 ) V and that we intend to deliver
        200 kW to the AC system, at unity power factor. Thus, the current command
        iref = 1000 cos(377t − π2 ) A must be tracked by the closed-loop converter sys-
        tem. Figure 3.15 shows the system closed-loop response to iref when a PI
        compensator is employed. As Figure 3.15 illustrates, i(t) is about 37◦ delayed
        with respect to iref (t) and Vs (t). Moreover, the amplitude of i is only about
        800 A. Consequently, rather than 200 kW at unity power factor, 128 kW and
        96 kVAr are delivered to the AC-side source.

To further investigate the mechanism of the time-varying command tracking, consider
the closed-loop control system of Figure 3.16 with the transfer function
                                                   i(s)                (s)
                                                          = Gi (s) =          ,                 (3.9)
                                                 iref (s)            1 + (s)



                     1000
                      750          iref
                                                                i
 Vs (s) and i (A)




                      500
                      250
                        0
                     −250
                     −500
                                                    Vs
                     −750
                    −1000
                            0.09           0.1           0.11            0.12     0.13   0.14
                                                                    time (s)
FIGURE 3.15 Steady-state error in phase and amplitude of the current when PI compensator
is employed; Example 3.5.
62      CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER

                                                                  Half-bridge
                                 Compensator                       converter
                          e(s)                             u(s)
iref (s)                                K(s)                         G(s)            i(s)
                      −


       FIGURE 3.16 A simpliﬁed control block diagram of the half-bridge converter.


where the loop gain (s) is deﬁned as

                                          (s) = K(s)G(s).                         (3.10)

The frequency response of the closed-loop system is

                                                         (jω)
                                     Gi (s)|s=jω =               ,                 (3.11)
                                                       1 + (jω)

which can be expressed in polar coordinates as

                                       Gi (jω) = |Gi (jω)|ejδ ,                    (3.12)

where |Gi (jω)| and δ denote the magnitude and the phase of Gi (jω), respectively.
Based on the deﬁnition of the frequency response, the steady-state response of
the closed-loop system to a sinusoidal command (with frequency ω0 ) is scaled by
|Gi (jω0 )| and phase shifted by δ, with respect to the command. If the sinusoidal com-
mand is to be tracked with zero steady-state error, |Gi (jω0 )| must be equal to unity,
and δ must be zero. Based on (3.11), this is fulﬁlled if |(jω0 )|, that is, the loop-gain
magnitude, is inﬁnity at the frequency of the command signal. For example, if two of
the poles of K(s) are located at s = ±jω0 , then |(jω0 )| = +∞, and the sinusoidal
command is tracked with zero steady-state errors. In general, to follow a command
with zero steady-state error, the unstable poles of the Laplace transform of the com-
mand must be included in the compensator. This not only ensures command tracking
with zero steady-state error but also eliminates all disturbances of the same type, in
the steady state.1 In a commonly faced scenario, to track a step (DC) command with
zero steady-state error, and to reject constant disturbances, K(s) includes an integral
term, that is, it possesses a pole at s = 0; the PI compensator is a special form of such
a compensator.
   As an alternative method, the sinusoidal command tracking can be achieved if
K(s) is designed in such a way that the bandwidth of the closed-loop system is

1 This is known as the internal-model principle [33–36].
                                                      SINUSOIDAL COMMAND FOLLOWING               63

adequately larger than the frequency of the command signal. In this approach, no
attempt is usually made to include the unstable poles of the command signal in the
compensator. Consequently, the tracking will not be perfect and a steady-state error,
although small, is inevitable. The design procedure is almost the same in both methods
and illustrated by Example 3.6.

   EXAMPLE 3.6                 Sinusoidal Command Following with a Modiﬁed
   Compensator
   Consider the half-bridge converter of Example 3.5 and the control block diagram
   of Figure 3.6. Let us assume that iref is required to be tracked with zero steady-
   state error and that a closed-loop bandwidth of about 3500 rad/s (i.e., about 9
   times ω0 ) is desired.
       To satisfy the zero steady-state error requirement, we include a pair of
   complex-conjugate poles in the compensator, at s = ±377j rad/s. Thus, a candi-
   date compensator is K(s) = (s2 + (377)2 )−1 H(s), where H(s) = h(N(s)/D(s))
   is a rational fraction of the polynomials N(s) and D(s), and h is a constant.2
   The compensator zeros, and the other poles (if required) must be located in the
   s plane such that the closed-loop system is stable, a reasonable phase margin
   is achieved, and the switching ripple content of the control signal u is low.
   The compensator can be designed based on either the root-locus method or
   the frequency-response approach. For this example, we adopt the frequency-
   response method (also known as the loop shaping).
       If H(jω) = 1, that is, K(jω) = [−ω2 + (377)2 ]−1 , the magnitude and
   phase plots of (jω) = K(jω)G(jω) = K(jω)[jLω + (R + ron )]−1 assume the
   shapes shown by dashed lines in Figure 3.17. It is observed that at very low fre-
   quencies (jω) has a constant magnitude, and the phase delay is insigniﬁcant.
   However, due to the open-loop pole s = −(R + ron )/L, the magnitude starts
   to roll off at about ω = 8.52 rad/s. The pole also results in a phase drop with
   a slope of −45◦ /dec, such that the phase settles at −90◦ for frequencies larger
   than 85 rad/s. At ω = 377 rad/s, that is, the resonance frequency of the complex-
   conjugate poles, the loop-gain magnitude peaks to inﬁnity but continues to roll
   off with a slope of −60 dB/dec. The resonance also results in a −180◦ phase
   delay, such that the loop-gain phase drops to −270◦ , for frequencies larger than
   377 rad/s.
       To achieve a stable closed-loop system, one must ensure that the loop-gain
   phase at the gain crossover frequency is larger than −180◦ , by a value that
   is referred to as the phase margin. The gain crossover frequency, denoted by
   ωc , is the frequency at which the loop-gain magnitude becomes unity (0 dB)
   [37]. On the other hand, the gain crossover frequency and the −3 dB bandwidth
   of the closed-loop system, denoted by ωb , are closely correlated, such that, in
   general, ωb satisﬁes the inequality ωc < ωb < 2ωc and can be approximated as
   ωb ≈ 1.5ωc . Therefore, ωc is imposed if a certain value is required for ωb . In this

2 N(s) and D(s) are arranged such that the coefﬁcients of their highest order terms are unity.
64                CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


                  200
                           without pole cancellation
                  100      with pole cancellation
   ( jω) (dB)




                    0

                 −100

                 −200
                   45
                    0
 ∠ ( jω) (deg)




                  −45
                  −90
                 −135
                 −180
                           without pole cancellation
                 −225
                           with pole cancellation
                 −270
                      −1          0              1                 2    3                4
                    10          10            10               10      10          10
                                                       ω (rad/s)
FIGURE 3.17 Frequency response of the open-loop gain based on the compensator of (3.13);
Example 3.6.


      example, ωb = 3500 rad/s and, therefore, ωc needs to be placed at about 2333
      rad/s. However, at this frequency the loop-gain phase is −270◦ , corresponding
      to an unstable closed-loop system.
         The excessively low loop-gain phase described above is partly due to the
      pole of G(s) at s = −8.52 rad/s. This pole introduces a 90◦ phase delay for
      frequencies larger than 85 rad/s. Therefore, to improve the loop-gain phase, we
      cancel the pole by a compensator zero, placed at s = −8.52 rad/s. This pole/zero
      cancellation is permitted since the pole is on the left half plane (LHP). Thus,
      the modiﬁed compensator is

                                                  s + 8.52
                                       K(s) =               H(s).                 (3.13)
                                                s2 + (377)2

          The solid lines in Figure 3.17 illustrate the magnitude and phase plots of
      (jω) = K(jω)G(jω) for the modiﬁed compensator (3.13), with H(jω) = 1.
      It is noted that, using the modiﬁed compensator, the phase is zero and the
      magnitude is constant up to about ω = 377 rad/s; thereafter, the phase drops
      to −180◦ and remains constant, while the magnitude rolls off with a slope
      of −40 dB/dec. This frequency response suggests that for the gain crossover
      frequency of ωc = 2333 rad/s the phase margin is still insufﬁcient (it is zero).
      To achieve a reasonably large phase margin, the loop-gain phase at ωc must be
                                                     SINUSOIDAL COMMAND FOLLOWING                       65

   supplemented, for example, by means of a lead ﬁlter [38]. The lead ﬁlter is of
   the general form

                                                      s + (p1 /α)
                                       Flead (s) =                ,                                (3.14)
                                                        s + p1

   where p1 is the ﬁlter pole and α > 1 is a real constant. The maximum phase of
   the lead ﬁlter is
                                                    
                                         −1 α − 1
                                δm = sin               ,                     (3.15)
                                               α+1

   which occurs at the frequency

                                                    p1
                                               ωm = √ .                                            (3.16)
                                                     α

   To add the maximum possible value to the loop-gain phase, one can choose ωm
   to be equal to ωc .
      In this example, let us assume that a phase margin of about 45◦ is desired.
   Since the loop-gain phase at ω > 377 rad/s is −180◦ , we choose δm = 45◦ .
   This, based on (3.15), yields α = 5.83, which is the pole to zero ratio of the
   lead ﬁlter. Then, if ωm = ωc = 2333 rad/s, it follows from (3.16) that p1 = 5633
   rad/s and z1 = p1 /α = 966 rad/s. Thus, the compensator (3.13) is modiﬁed to
                                                                       
                                               s + 8.52           s + 966
                             K(s) = h                                      .                       (3.17)
                                             s2 + (377)2         s + 5633

   Finally, the constant gain h is determined as h = 8680 /s, based on (jωc ) +
   1 = 0 (or |(jωc )| = 1).
      The dashed lines in Figure 3.18 show the magnitude and phase plots of
   (jω) when the compensator (3.17) is employed and illustrate that at ωc the
   loop-gain phase is about −135◦ , corresponding to a phase margin of about
   45◦ . It should be noted that the loop-gain magnitude is constant over a wide
   range of frequencies, up to ω = 377 rad/s. To ensure that the loop gain exhibits
   a large magnitude at low frequencies, we should also include a lag ﬁlter in
   the compensator.3 The loop-gain magnitude is increased at low frequencies by
   about 32 dB if the following lag ﬁlter is introduced:

                                                         s+2
                                         Flag (s) =             .                                  (3.18)
                                                       s + 0.05

3 An integral term in the compensator makes this possible. However, the integral term imposes a phase shift

of −90◦ at all frequencies, including the crossover frequency, and thus has a destabilizing impact on the
closed-loop system.
66                 CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


                   200
                              without lag filter
                   150        with lag filter (finalized compensator)
                                                                                         ωc
     ( jω) (dB)



                   100
                    50
                     0
                  −50
                  −100

                    45
  ∠ ( jω) (deg)




                     0
                  −45
                  −90
                  −135        without lag filter
                              with lag filter (finalized compensator)
                  −180
                         −3     −2           −1      0           1         2         3         4        5
                    10        10       10          10          10         10       10         10     10
                                                              ω (rad/s)
FIGURE 3.18 Open-loop frequency responses based on the compensators (3.17) and (3.19);
Example 3.6.



        The lag ﬁlter (3.18) has the property that Flag (jω) ≈ 1 for frequencies larger
        than about 100 rad/s. Therefore, it does not change the phase or magnitude of
        the loop gain around the crossover frequency ωc = 2330 rad/s. Thus, the phase
        margin, bandwidth, and command tracking capability of our design remain
        unchanged in spite of the introduction of the lag ﬁlter. The ﬁnal compensator
        is thus expressed as
                                                                                     
                                             s + 8.52          s + 966           s+2
                         K(s) = 8680                                                          [].   (3.19)
                                           s2 + (377)2        s + 5633         s + 0.05

       The solid lines in Figure 3.18 illustrate the magnitude and phase plots of (jω)
       when the compensator (3.19) is employed. It is noted that for frequencies
       around the crossover frequency, the loop gain exhibits the same behavior under
       the compensators (3.19) and (3.17). Two remaining tasks of the controller
       design are to examine (i) the adequacy of the gain margin and (ii) the loop-
       gain magnitude at the converter switching frequency.4

4 To be more precise, we should consider the switching frequency side bands since the modulating waveform

is a sinusoid. However, in our case the side bands are close to the switching frequency, and we can consider
the switching frequency instead.
                                               SINUSOIDAL COMMAND FOLLOWING               67

                      0
                     −3
 Gcl ( jω) (dB)



                    −20
                                                                ωb
                    −30
                    −40
                    −50
                      0
 ∠Gcl ( jω) (deg)




                    −45

                    −90

                    −135

                    −180
                           0    1          2                3           4                 5
                      10       10       10             10            10             10
                                                ω (rad/s)
FIGURE 3.19 Closed-loop frequency response of the half-bridge converter; Example 3.6.



        As Figure 3.18 indicates, as the loop-gain phase approaches −180◦ at high
    frequencies, the loop-gain magnitude drops to very small values. Thus, the
    phase crossover frequency and the gain margin are inﬁnity in this closed-loop
    system. In addition, the converter switching frequency is equal to 3420 Hz,
    corresponding to 21488 rad/s, at which the loop-gain magnitude is about −30
    dB. Furthermore, it can be veriﬁed that the switching ripple content of the
    control signal u is about 2.5 times smaller than that of the error signal e.
        The foregoing compensator design procedure is comprehensive but cum-
    bersome. Moreover, (3.19) is a relatively high-order compensator and may be
    difﬁcult to implement. As discussed in Chapter 7, two such compensators will
    be required for a three-phase VSC system that is controlled in the αβ-frame.
    Therefore, a special case of (3.19) is proposed in the literature that is analogous
    to a conventional PI compensator, and thus has only two parameters to tune. This
    class of compensators is referred to as a stationary-frame generalized integrator
    [39] or a proportional-plus-resonant compensator (P+Resonant) [40], and is
    applicable to both single-phase and three-phase converter systems.
        Figure 3.19 shows the closed-loop frequency response of the control system
    of Figure 3.9. It can be observed that the −3 dB bandwidth of the closed-loop
    system is about ωb = 3820 rad/s. Moreover, at ω = 377 rad/s the magnitude
    and phase of the closed-loop transfer function are unity and zero, respectively.
    Figure 3.20 shows the closed-loop time response of the half-bridge converter
    to iref = 1000 cos(377t − π2 ) A, when the compensator (3.19) is employed.
68                  CONTROL OF HALF-BRIDGE CONVERTER


                    1000
                              (a) iref
 Vs (s) and i(A)

                     500                                   i
                       0
                   −500                        Vs
                   −1000

                    600
                    400       (b)
                    200
       u(V)




                      0
                   −200
                   −400
                   −600
                       1
                    0.75      (c)
                     0.5
                    0.25
                       0
       m




                   −0.25
                    −0.5
                   −0.75
                      −1
                           0.09          0.1        0.11            0.12   0.13   0.14
                                                               time (s)
FIGURE 3.20 Response of the half-bridge converter to a sinusoidal command, based on the
compensator of (3.19); Example 3.6.


        Figure 3.20(a) illustrates that i(t) rapidly reaches and tracks iref , without am-
        plitude or phase-angle errors. Figure 3.20(b) and (c) shows the waveforms of
        the compensator output (control signal) and the modulating signal, respectively.
        It is observed that the switching ripples of these signals are small.

   A comparison of the corresponding results in Examples 3.5 and 3.6 shows that
the compensator structure is signiﬁcantly more complex for sinusoidal command
tracking than that for the DC command tracking. As noted in Example 3.5, a PI
compensator is sufﬁcient to ensure DC command following with a satisfactory per-
formance. However, as indicated by Example 3.6, a more elaborate compensator is
required to track a sinusoidal command, with a high degree of ﬁdelity. Furthermore,
the control loop must be designed for a much wider bandwidth in case of sinusoidal
command following.
   In three-phase VSC systems, we are often interested in tracking a sinusoidal com-
mand, rapidly and with small steady-state errors. We also need to stipulate rapid
changes in the amplitude and/or the phase of the commands. Therefore, the control
design is noticeably simpliﬁed if we can transform the problem of sinusoidal com-
mand tracking to a DC command tracking problem. The reference-frame theory and
the techniques introduced in Chapter 4 are instrumental to that end.
4 Space Phasors and
           Two-Dimensional Frames


4.1     INTRODUCTION

Chapter 3 investigated control of the half-bridge converter. The half-bridge converter
is the main building block of the three-phase voltage-sourced converter (VSC), and the
three-phase VSC control deals with simultaneous control of three half-bridge convert-
ers. As discussed in Chapter 3, while only a proportional-integral (PI) compensator
can enable a half-bridge converter system to track a DC command, the compensator
must be of higher order and bandwidth if a sinusoidal command is to be tracked. In a
three-phase VSC system, we are invariably interested in tracking sinusoidal voltage
or current commands. Therefore, the compensator design task inherently faces the
same hardships as discussed in Chapter 3 for a half-bridge converter system track-
ing a sinusoidal command. The αβ-frame and the dq-frame, the two main classes of
two-dimensional frames, are introduced in this chapter to simplify the analysis and
control1 .
    The αβ-frame enables one to transform the problem of controlling a system of
three half-bridge converters to an equivalent problem of controlling two equivalent
subsystems. Moreover, the concept of instantaneous reactive power can be deﬁned
in the αβ-frame [41]. The dq-frame possesses the same merits as the αβ-frame, in
addition to the following:

      r If the control is exercised in the dq-frame, a sinusoidal command tracking prob-
        lem is transformed to an equivalent DC command tracking problem. Hence, PI
        compensators can be used for the control.
      r In abc-frame, models of speciﬁc types of electric machine exhibit time-varying,
        mutually coupled inductances. If the model is expressed in dq-frame, the time-
        varying inductances are transformed to (equivalent) constant parameters.
      r Conventionally, components of large power systems are formulated and analyzed
        in dq-frame [42]. Therefore, representation of VSC systems in the dq-frame

1 In the literature, the αβ-frame and the dq-frame are also called the stationary frame and the rotating frame,

respectively.


Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,       by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                            69
70        SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


         enables analysis and design tasks based on methodologies that are commonly
         employed for power systems, in a uniﬁed framework.

   In this chapter, ﬁrst, the space phasor is introduced as a generalization of the
conventional phasor. In addition, appropriate procedures are presented to (i) express
a balanced three-phase function by an equivalent space phasor, (ii) stipulate dynamic
changes in the amplitude and phase angle of a three-phase signal, and (iii) formulate a
compact, equivalent, space-phasor representation for a balanced three-phase system.
Then, the αβ-frame and the dq-frame are introduced as immediate by-products of the
space-phasor concept. Finally, generic control schemes are introduced for the control
of a three-phase VSC system in the αβ-frame and the dq-frame.


4.2 SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF A BALANCED
THREE-PHASE FUNCTION

4.2.1      Deﬁnition of Space Phasor
Consider the following balanced, three-phase, sinusoidal function 2

                             fa (t) = f cos (ωt + θ0 ) ,
                                                            
                                                         2π
                             fb (t) = f cos ωt + θ0 −          ,
                                                           3
                                                            
                                                          4π
                             fc (t) = f cos ωt + θ0 −         ,                            (4.1)
                                                           3

where f , θ0 , and ω are the amplitude, the initial phase angle, and the angular frequency
of the function, respectively. For the sinusoidal function (4.1), the space phasor is
deﬁned as

                     →
                     −       2  j0          2π            4π
                                                                    
                     f (t) =    e fa (t) + ej 3 fb (t) + ej 3 fc (t) .                      (4.2)
                             3

Substituting for fabc from (4.1) in (4.2), and using the identities cos θ = 21 (ejθ + e−jθ )
                2π     4π
and ej0 + ej 3 + ej 3 ≡ 0, one obtains
                              →
                              −
                              f (t) = (f ejθ0 )ejωt = f ejωt ,                             (4.3)

where f = f ejθ0 . The complex quantity f can be represented by a vector in the
complex plane. If f is a constant, the vector is analogous to the conventional phasor

2 This function can represent a three-phase signal, or three time-varying parameters, for example,
inductances.
    SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF A BALANCED THREE-PHASE FUNCTION                     71


                                                   Im


                π          π                                       f(t = 0) = f
     f (t =       ) = fe j 2                            ω                    −
               2ω    –




                                                             θ0
                                                                                  Re

  Radius = fˆ




                        f(t) = fe jωt
                              −

              FIGURE 4.1 Space-phasor representation in the complex plane.


that is used to analyze linear circuits under steady-state sinusoidal conditions, and
           →
           −
the tip of f (t) moves along the circumference of a circle centered at the complex
                                                          →
                                                          −
plane origin (Fig. 4.1). Based on (4.3), the space phasor f (t) is the same phasor f
                                                                                   →
                                                                                   −
that rotates counterclockwise with the angular speed ω. It should be noted that f (t)
retains the form expressed by (4.3) even if f is not a constant; if f is a function of
time, the corresponding phasor f is also a complex-valued function of time.
   The deﬁnition of the space phasor can be extended to include a variable-frequency
three-phase function [43]. Consider the three-phase function

                            fa (t) = f (t) cos [θ(t)] ,
                                                           
                                                         2π
                            fb (t) = f (t) cos θ(t) −        ,
                                                          3
                                                           
                                                         4π
                            fc (t) = f (t) cos θ(t) −        ,                   (4.4)
                                                          3

where
                                              t
                               θ(t) = θ0 +         ω(τ)dτ                         (4.5)
                                               0
72     SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


                                Equation (4.2)


     fa (t)
                                   abc
     fb (t)                                                                    f (t)

     fc (t)                            space
                                       phasor

               FIGURE 4.2 abc-frame to space-phasor signal transformer.


and ω(t) is a time-varying frequency. Based on (4.2), the space phasor corresponding
to (4.4) is expressed as
                                  →
                                  −
                                  f (t) = f (t)ejθ(t) .                            (4.6)

As (4.6) suggests, a space phasor in its most general form embeds information on
the amplitude, phase angle, and frequency of the corresponding three-phase func-
tion. The space phasors represented by (4.3) and (4.6) are identical if ω(t) is a
constant. Based on (4.2), we deﬁne the abc-frame to space-phasor signal transformer
of Figure 4.2.
   The real-valued components fa (t), fb (t), and fc (t) can be retrieved from the cor-
responding space phasor, based on the following equations:
                                         −
                                          → −j0 
                              fa (t) = Re f (t)e     ,
                                         −
                                          →       2π
                                                     
                              fb (t) = Re f (t)e−j 3 ,
                                         −
                                          →       4π
                                                     
                              fc (t) = Re f (t)e−j 3 ,                              (4.7)

where Re{·} is the real-part operator. Based on (4.7), fa (t), fb (t), and fc (t) are pro-
                           →
                           −      →
                                  −       2π       →
                                                   −        4π
jections of, respectively, f (t), f (t)e−j 3 , and f (t)e−j 3 on the real axis of the
complex plane. Figure 4.3 illustrates the block diagram of a space phasor to abc-
frame signal transformer, based on (4.7).
    SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF A BALANCED THREE-PHASE FUNCTION                  73


                                Equation (4.7)

                               space
                               phasor                                      fa (t)

        f (t)                                                              fb (t)

                                             abc                           fc (t)


                FIGURE 4.3 Space phasor to abc-frame signal transformer.




4.2.2     Changing the Amplitude and Phase Angle of a Three-phase Signal
Control of a VSC system typically involves tracking of sinusoidal commands. Since
a sinusoidal signal is characterized by its amplitude and phase, it may be necessary
in some applications to stipulate changes in the amplitude and/or the phase of the
reference commands or control signals. This can be conveniently achieved through
the space-phasor concept.
                                                                       →
                                                                       −
   Consider a three-phase signal fabc whose equivalent space phasor is f (t). Assume
                                                                     →
                                                                     −
that the objective is to ﬁnd a system that receives the space phasor f (t) as an input
                                 →
                                 −
and generates the space phasor f  (t) corresponding to a new three-phase signal with
the following properties:

   r The phase angle of each component of f  (t) is shifted by φ(t) with respect to
                                              abc
     that of the corresponding component of fabc , where φ(t) is an arbitrary function
     of time.
   r The amplitude of each component of f  (t) is A(t) times that of the correspond-
                                           abc
     ing component of fabc , where A(t) is an arbitrary function of time.

Let us call the aforementioned system the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler, which
enables the desired phase shift and amplitude scaling, based on

                              →
                              −       →
                                      −
                              f (t) = f (t)A(t)ejφ(t) .                          (4.8)
74       SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES



                                                            f(t)A(t)e jφ(t)
 f(t)                                                 X                             f ′(t)

 φ (t)            cos(.)         X

                                            A(t)e jφ(t)
 A(t)


                  j sin(.)       X

           FIGURE 4.4 Block diagram of the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler.



Figure 4.4 illustrates a block representation of the space-phasor phase-shifter/
scaler.
   To understand the mechanism of the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of
Figure 4.4, consider the three-phase signal (4.1). Based on (4.3), the corresponding
                   →
                   −                                           →
                                                               −          →
                                                                          −
space phasor is f (t) = f ejθ0 ejωt . Figure 4.4 shows that f  (t) = f (t)A(t)ejφ(t) =
A(t)f e j(ωt+θ0 +φ(t)) . Then, based on (4.7), it can be shown that the three-phase signal
                     →
                     −
corresponding to f (t) is

                   fa (t) = A(t)f cos [(ωt + θ0 ) + φ(t)] ,
                                                                 
                                                       2π
                   fb (t) = A(t)f cos ωt + θ0 −             + φ(t) ,
                                                        3
                                                                 
                                                     4π
                   fc (t) = A(t)f cos ωt + θ0 −               + φ(t) .
                                                        3

The space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.4 can be modiﬁed to receive/deliver
abc-frame signals rather than space phasors. This is achieved by augmenting the
space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.4 with the abc-frame to space-phasor
and space-phasor to abc-frame signal transformers. The modiﬁed space-phasor phase-
shifter/scaler is illustrated in Figure 4.5.
   One application of the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.5 is in voltage-
controlled VSC systems that are usually encountered in high-power applications,
for example, in ﬂexible AC transmission systems (FACTS) controllers [1, 44, 45].
Figure 4.6 illustrates a simpliﬁed schematic diagram of a voltage-controlled VSC
system in which a three-phase VSC is interfaced with an AC system via a three-phase
inductor, L. If the resistance of the inductor is neglected, the real- and reactive-power
components exchanged between the VSC system and the AC system, that is, Ps and
Qs , can be effectively controlled by the phase angle and the amplitude of the VSC
     SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF A BALANCED THREE-PHASE FUNCTION                         75


              Equation (4.2)             Equation (4.8)              Equation (4.7)
                                                                       space
 f a (t)                                                               phasor         f ′a (t)
                 abc           f (t)                           f ′(t)
 f b (t)                                 Phase-shifter/                               f ′b(t)
                                            scaler
 f c (t)           space                                                  abc         f ′c(t)
                   phasor



                                          φ (t)         A(t)
       FIGURE 4.5 Block diagram of the modiﬁed space-phasor phase shifter/scaler.



AC-side terminal voltage, Vt -abc , relative to those of the AC system voltage, Vs-abc
[46, 47]. Thus, φ(t) (A(t)) is commanded by a (another) feedback loop that processes
the error between the real power (reactive power) and its respective reference value,
to regulate the real power (reactive power). The output of the space-phasor phase-
shifter/scaler corresponds to the terminal voltage to be reproduced by the VSC and is
delivered to the VSC pulse-width modulation (PWM) switching scheme.
   Example 4.1 illustrates the operation of the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of
Figure 4.4.




                                                                  Ps
                                          VSC and PWM




                                                                  Qs
                                                        Vt-abc L Vs-abc AC system
                       +
                                                                            +
                                                                            −




                       −




                 Ps                    Vt-abc
                   –
     Psref                 K1 (s)         φ (t)
                                                        Phase-shifter/scaler
     Qsref                 K2 (s)         A(t)             of Figure 4.5
                   –
                Qs
                                          Vs-abc
             FIGURE 4.6 Block diagram of voltage-controlled VSC system.
76           SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


     EXAMPLE 4.1                     Imposing Amplitude and Phase Changes on a Three-
     Phase Signal
     Let the following three-phase signal be given to the space-phasor phase-
     shifter/scaler of Figure 4.5:


                                        fa (t) = cos (377t) ,
                                                                
                                                              2π
                                        fb (t) = cos 377t −        ,
                                                               3
                                                                
                                                              4π
                                        fc (t) = cos 377t −        .
                                                               3

                                                            →
                                                            −
     The system of Figure 4.5 ﬁrst converts fabc to f (t), based on an abc-
                                                               →
                                                               −
     frame to space-phasor signal transformation. Then f (t) is converted to
     →
     −
      f (t) by means of a space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.4. Finally,
     →
     −                             
      f (t) is transformed to fabc      by means of a space-phasor to abc-frame
     transformation.
         Assume that A(t) is a step function changing from 1 to 1.5 at t = 66 ms,
     while φ(t) ≡ 0. Figure 4.7 shows the output of the system of Figure 4.5, that
           (t). It is observed that at t = 66 ms the amplitude of f
     is, fabc                                                         abc (t) suddenly
     changes from 1 to 1.5 without any shift in its phase angle. Now, consider the
     case where φ(t) is a step function changing from 0 to π, at t = 18 ms, while
     A(t) ≡ 1. Figure 4.8 shows that the polarity of fabc (t) becomes opposite at t =
     18 ms, but the amplitude is preserved.


The space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.5 can also be used to change the
frequency of a three-phase signal. For instance, provide the three-phase signal (4.1)



                2                                                           f a′ (t)   f b′ (t)   f c′ (t)
              1.5
                  f ′a(t) f b′ (t)     f c′ (t)
                1
              0.5
     f abc




                0
       ′




                                                                                                  f a′ (t)
             −0.5
                                                                                                  f b′ (t)
              −1
                                                                                                  f c′ (t)
             −1.5
               0.042 0.048            0.054       0.06   0.066      0.072        0.078       0.084           0.09
                                                         time (s)
                  FIGURE 4.7 A step change in the amplitude of a three-phase signal
     SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF A BALANCED THREE-PHASE FUNCTION                                                        77


                 f ′a(t)    f ′b(t)    f ′c(t)                      f ′a(t)        f ′b(t)     f ′c(t)
            1

           0.5
  f ′abc




            0
                                                                                                             f ′a(t)
       −0.5                                                                                                  f ′b(t)
                                                                                                             f ′c(t)
           −1
             0             0.006      0.012          0.018    0.024           0.03           0.036       0.042     0.048
                                                               time (s)
             FIGURE 4.8 A step change in the phase angle of a three-phase signal.



to the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.5. Then, the output is

                             fa (t) = A(t)f cos [(ωt + θ0 ) + φ(t)] ,
                                                                           
                                                                 2π
                             fb (t) = A(t)f cos ωt + θ0 −             + φ(t) ,
                                                                  3
                                                                           
                                                                 4π
                             fc (t) = A(t)f cos ωt + θ0 −             + φ(t) .
                                                                  3

If A(t) = 1 and φ(t) is determined based on
                                                         t
                                           φ(t) =             ω(τ)dτ,                                                   (4.9)
                                                         0

the output of the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler becomes
                                                      t                     
                           fa (t) = f cos ωt + θ0 +                   ω(τ)dτ ,
                                                                0
                                                                              t             
                           fb (t) = f cos ωt + θ0 − 2π/3 +                            ω(τ)dτ ,
                                                                               0
                                                                              t                 
                           fc (t) = f cos          ωt + θ0 − 4π/3 +                   ω(τ)dτ ,                       (4.10)
                                                                               0


where ω(t) is an arbitrary function of time. The signal fabc (t) described by (4.10)

represents a three-phase signal of which the frequency is ω + ω(t) and, thus, can
be varied by ω(t). A special case corresponds to ω(t) = −ω, where the frequency
                                          dissolves into three DC signals. It should,
of the output signal becomes zero and fabc
however, be noted that the three DC signals still constitute a balanced three-phase
signal. Example 4.2 illustrates this operation.
78            SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES



                                      tf

                1
               0.5
     f ′abc




                0       f a′ (t)
              −0.5      f b′ (t)
                        f ′c(t)
               −1
                 0     0.025         0.05     0.075     0.1      0.125   0.15    0.175   0.2
                                                      time (s)
              FIGURE 4.9 Changing the frequency of a three-phase signal; Example 4.2.


     EXAMPLE 4.2                   Changing the Frequency of a Three-Phase Signal
     Assume that the following three-phase signal is the input to the space-phasor
     phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.5:

                                        fa (t) = cos (377t) ,
                                                                
                                                              2π
                                        fb (t) = cos 377t −        ,
                                                               3
                                                                
                                                              4π
                                        fc (t) = cos 377t −        .
                                                               3

     Also, let       ω(t) be
                                    ⎧
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎨
                                               0,                  t < tf ,
                        ω(t) =          −(2π)(445)(t − tf ) , tf ≤ t ≤ 0.1848,
                                    ⎪
                                    ⎩         −377 ,              t ≥ 0.1848,

     where tf = 0.05 s. Figure 4.9 shows the corresponding output, that is, fabc (t),

     and indicates that the frequency is constant (at 60 Hz) until tf = 0.05 s. How-
     ever, the frequency decreases at the rate of 445 Hz/s until it reaches zero at
     t = 0.1848 s. Thereafter, the three-phase output signal is frozen and its com-
     ponents settle at constant values.


4.2.3 Generating a Controllable-Amplitude/Controllable-Frequency
Three-Phase Signal
In some applications, both the amplitude and the frequency of a three-phase signal
must be controlled. This objective can be achieved following the concept of space
phasors, as shown in the block diagram of Figure 4.10. The signal generator of
Figure 4.10 is conceptually the same space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure
4.5 except that the abc-frame to space-phasor transformation block is omitted, and
    SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF A BALANCED THREE-PHASE FUNCTION                  79




FIGURE 4.10 Block diagram of a controllable-frequency/amplitude three-phase signal gen-
erator.

→
−                                                                            →
                                                                             −
 f (t) in this case is the unit space phasor with phase angle zero, that is, f = 1ej0 .
The function of the signal generator of Figure 4.10 is to shift the unit space phasor
by angle θ(t), which is composed of a time-varying component and a constant
component. The time-varying component is the integral of a prespeciﬁed angular
frequency, for example, ω(t), and causes the unit space-phasor to rotate with the same
frequency. The constant component speciﬁes the initial phase angle of the rotating
space phasor. The length of the rotating space phasor and, thus, the amplitude of the
resulting three-phase signal can be controlled by A(t). The rotating space phasor is
ﬁnally converted to the corresponding three-phase signal, based on (4.7).
An interesting special case takes place when ω(t) is a negative constant value, for
example, ω(t) = −ω. For the sake of simplicity, let us assume that A(t) ≡ 1. Thus,
                                                   →
                                                   −
the rotating space phasor will have the form of f  (t) = ej(−ωt+θ0 ) . Then, based on
(4.7) the corresponding three-phase signal is

                          fa (t) = cos (−ωt + θ0 ) ,
                                                        
                                                      2π
                          fb (t) = cos −ωt + θ0 −         ,
                                                       3
                                                        
                                                     4π
                          fc (t) = cos −ωt + θ0 −          .                    (4.11)
                                                       3

Equation (4.11) represents a three-phase signal that has a negative frequency. Since
a negative frequency has no physical meaning, we use the identity cos(−θ) = cos θ
to have a positive-frequency three-phase signal. Thus, (4.11) can be rewritten as

                           fa (t) = cos (ωt − θ0 ) ,
                                                        
                                                     2π
                           fb (t) = cos ωt − θ0 +          ,
                                                       3
                                                        
                                                      4π
                           fc (t) = cos ωt − θ0 +         ,
                                                       3
80        SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES




                                                                    VSC and PWM
                                                                                        Vst-abc
                                              +                                             ist-abc
                                              −                                                        IM

                                                                                                      ωr

                                                                              Vst-abc
                                       iˆs            Vˆst
                                                             A(t)
     ω r-ref            e K(s) ωslip                  ωst          Signal generator
                                                             ω (t) of Figure 4.10
                    −
                                                  0          θ0

               FIGURE 4.11 Block diagram of a variable-speed induction motor drive.



which in turn is equivalent to

                                 fa (t) = cos (ωt − θ0 ) ,
                                                              
                                                           4π
                                 fb (t) = cos ωt − θ0 −          ,
                                                             3
                                                              
                                                           2π
                                 fc (t) = cos ωt − θ0 −          .                                         (4.12)
                                                             3

Equation (4.12) indicates that the phase sequence in the output signal is reversed
from the abc to the acb. In other words, a space phasor with a negative frequency
corresponds to a negative-sequence three-phase signal.
   One known application of the signal generator of Figure 4.10 is in variable-speed
asynchronous motor drives [48]. Figure 4.11 illustrates a simpliﬁed schematic diagram
of such a motor drive in which a three-phase VSC controls the machine stator voltage
Vst−abc [16, 43]. The machine speed, ωr , is compared with the reference command,
and the error is processed by a compensator. The output of the compensator, ωslip ,
corresponds to the slip frequency and is added to ωr to determine the required stator
frequency, ωst , as shown in Figure 4.11. On the other hand, the amplitude of the
stator voltage is determined through a nonlinear static function, based on the stator
frequency and the amplitude of the stator current. Thus, at a small torque (resulting
                            st is almost proportional to ωst (constant V/f operation).
in a small stator current), V
            
However, Vst is further boosted at higher values of torque, to compensate for the
stator resistive voltage drop. The required values of ωst and V st are delivered to the
three-phase signal generator of Figure 4.10 whose output corresponds to the stator
voltage to be synthesized by the VSC through the PWM strategy.
     SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF A BALANCED THREE-PHASE FUNCTION                          81


                                                 t0
            1
  f ′abc




            0        f ′a(t)
                     f ′b(t)
                     f ′c(t)
           −1
                0        0.05         0.1       0.15        0.2         0.25           0.3
                                              time (s)
           FIGURE 4.12 Reversing the sequence of the phases of a three-phase signal.



   EXAMPLE 4.3                 Reversing Phase Sequence of a Three-Phase Signal
   Consider the three-phase signal generator of Figure 4.10 with θ0 ≡ 0, A(t) ≡
   1, and ω(t) = 377 − 2513t. Thus, the frequency is initially 60 Hz but decreases
   as a ramp function with a slope of 400 Hz/s. The frequency crosses zero at t =
   0.15 s and becomes negative thereafter.
       Figure 4.12 shows the output waveform of the signal generator of Figure 4.10.
   Until t = 0.15 s, the positive frequency is decreased. Therefore, the period of
   each sinusoidal constituent increases, but the phase sequence does not change.
   At t = 0.15 s, the frequency crosses zero and becomes negative thereafter.
   Consequently, as Figure 4.12 illustrates, the phase sequence is reversed and the
   output signal period decreases as the absolute value of the negative frequency
   becomes larger.


4.2.4      Space-Phasor Representation of Harmonics
In an electrical energy system, voltage and current waveforms are often periodic func-
tions of time and may include harmonic components. Nonlinearities and switching
processes are the two main reasons for the existence of harmonics, although some
control instabilities can also lead to the generation of harmonics. Harmonics cause dis-
tortion in the corresponding fundamental waveforms and usually have adverse impact
on the efﬁciency and performance of systems. This section applies the space-phasor
deﬁnition of Section 4.2.1 to harmonics.
   Consider the following three-phase signal:

                    fa (t) = f1 cos (ωt) + fn cos (nωt) ,
                                                                    
                                            2π                   2nπ
                    fb (t) = f1 cos ωt −           + fn cos nωt −        ,
                                              3                     3
                                                                    
                                             4π                    4nπ
                    fc (t) = f1 cos ωt −          + fn cos nωt −       ,             (4.13)
                                              3                     3
82      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


where f1 is the amplitude of the fundamental, n is the order of the harmonic, and fn
is the amplitude of the harmonic. Applying the deﬁnition of the space phasor, (4.4),
one obtains
                                          →
                                          −                  →
                                                             −
                                          f (t) = f1 ejωt + fn (t),                               (4.14)

where

                   →
                   −              fn                    2π           4π
                                                                          
                   fn (t) =                   1 + e−j(n−1) 3 + e−j(n−1) 3 ejnωt
                                   3

                                    fn                      2π          4π
                                                                             
                              +                    1 + ej(n+1) 3 + ej(n+1) 3 e−jnωt .              (4.15)
                                     3

                                →
                                −
    Equation (4.14) shows that f (t) is composed of two space phasors. The ﬁrst
space phasor corresponds to the fundamental component of the three-phase signal
and rotates counterclockwise with the angular frequency ω. The second space phasor,
→
−                                                                   →
                                                                    −
fn (t), corresponds to the harmonic component. Based on (4.15), fn (t) ≡ 0 if n is
                                      →
                                      −
an integer multiple of 3. Otherwise, fn (t) is a space phasor with the length fn and
rotates with the angular frequency nω. However, the direction of its rotation depends
                                 →
                                 −
on the harmonic order. We call fn (t) a positive-sequence space-phasor if it rotates
counterclockwise. Thus, we refer to the three-phase waveform corresponding to a
positive-sequence space phasor as a positive-sequence harmonic. Similarly, we call
→
−
fn (t) a negative-sequence space phasor if it rotates clockwise and refer to its corre-
sponding three-phase waveform as a negative-sequence harmonic. Harmonics with
orders of multiple of 3 are called zero-sequence harmonics as they correspond to
→
−
fn (t) ≡ 0. Based on (4.15), a set of positive- and negative-sequence harmonics are
listed in Table 4.13 .


4.3 SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF THREE-PHASE
SYSTEMS

The three-phase to space-phasor transformation and its inverse transformation were
discussed in Section 4.2. Using the space-phasor concept, the procedures to dynami-
cally change the amplitude and frequency of a signal were also presented. The signals
under consideration can be reference signals, feedback signals, control signals, and so
on. Since we have identiﬁed the tools to process signals in the space-phasor domain,
it is warranted to introduce a methodology to model a generic three-phase system in
the space-phasor domain. In the subsequent developments, for simplicity and without
loss of generality, we illustrate examples dealing with linear systems. In particular,

3 The discussion of Section 4.2.4 is valid only for balanced periodic waveforms. The phase sequences of the

harmonics of an unbalanced three-phase waveform do not necessarily conform to the result of Table 4.1.
                   SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                 83

TABLE 4.1    Positive- and Negative-Sequence Harmonics

Positive-Sequence Harmonic         Negative-Sequence Harmonic
       →
       −        n ejnωt                 →
                                         −        n e−jnωt
       fn (t) = f                        fn (t) = f

          n=1                                  n=2
           4                                     5
           7                                     8
           10                                   11
           13                                   14
           19                                   17
           22                                   20
           25                                   23
           28                                   26
           31                                   32


we identify three classes of three-phase systems: symmetrical and decoupled, sym-
metrical and coupled, and asymmetrical.


4.3.1   Decoupled Symmetrical Three-Phase Systems
Consider the three-phase system of Figure 4.13 in which each phase of the output yabc
is controlled by the corresponding phase of the input uabc . The system of Figure 4.13 is
composed of three decoupled identical subsystems. The system is symmetrical since
the input/output relationships of the three phases retain their original expressions if


                                  Symmetrical decoupled
                                      three-phase
                                     linear system

                                    System for phase a


                             ua            G (s)          ya



                                   System for phase b


                             ub            G(s)           yb



                                   System for phase c

                             uc            G (s)          yc



  FIGURE 4.13 Block diagram of a symmetrical, decoupled, linear, three-phase system.
84          SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


index a is replaced by b, index b is replaced by c, and index c is replaced by a in the
phase equations. Let the input/output relationship of each subsystem be described by
a transfer function, G(s), as

                                     Ya (s) = G(s)Ua (s),
                                     Yb (s) = G(s)Ub (s),
                                     Yc (s) = G(s)Uc (s),                               (4.16)

where G(s) = (km sm + km−1 sm−1 + · · · + k0 )/(sn + ln−1 sn−1 + · · · + l0 ) is a ratio-
nal transfer function; it can be veriﬁed based on (4.16) that the system of Figure 4.13
is symmetrical. The time-domain equations of the three-phase system are

     d n ya         d n−1 ya                       d m ua        d m−1 ua
            + l n−1          + · · · + l  y
                                         0 a = k m        + km−1          + · · · + k0 ua ,
      dt n           dt n−1                         dt m          dt m−1
                                                                                        (4.17)
     d n yb        d n−1 yb                        d m ub        d m−1 ub
            + ln−1          + · · · + l 0 yb = k m        + km−1          + · · · + k0 u b ,
      dt n          dt n−1                          dt m          dt m−1
                                                                                        (4.18)


      d n yc        d n−1 yc                        d m uc         d m−1 uc
             + ln−1          + · · · + l 0 yc = k m        + k m−1          + · · · + k0 uc .
       dt n          dt n−1                          dt m           dt m−1
                                                                                         (4.19)
                                                                                       2π
Multiplying both sides of (4.17), (4.18), and (4.19), respectively, by 23 ej0 , 23 ej 3 , and
2    j 4π
3e          , one obtains
        3


                                                               
            dn   2 j0           d n−1 2 j0                   2 j0
                   e ya + ln−1 n−1       e ya + · · · + l0     e ya
            dt n 3              dt     3                     3
                                                                        
                    d m 2 j0            d m−1 2 j0                     2 j0
              = km m       e ya + km−1 m−1       e ya + · · · + k0       e ya ,
                   dt    3              dt     3                       3
                                                                                        (4.20)

                                                                    
      dn       2 j 2π            d n−1 2 j 2π                   2 j 2π
                 e 3 yb + ln−1 n−1        e 3 yb + · · · + l0     e 3 yb
      dt n     3                 dt     3                       3
                                                                              
                  d m 2 j 2π             d m−1 2 j 2π                      2 j 2π
            = km m        e 3 yb + km−1 m−1        e 3 y b + · · · + k0      e 3 yb ,
                 dt     3                dt      3                         3
                                                                                        (4.21)
                    SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                      85

                                                            
    dn   2 j 4π          d n−1 2 j 4π                   2 j 4π
           e 3 yc + ln−1 n−1      e 3 yc + · · · + l0     e 3 yc
    dt n 3               dt     3                       3
                                                                     
            d m 2 j 4π           d m−1 2 j 4π                      2 j 4π
      = km m        e yc + km−1 m−1
                      3                    e yc + · · · + k 0
                                             3                       e yc .
                                                                        3
           dt     3              dt      3                         3
                                                                                     (4.22)

Adding the corresponding sides of (4.20), (4.21), and (4.22), and using (4.2), one
concludes that

dn − →         d n−1 −→              −
                                     →      dm − →         d m−1 −→
     y + l n−1        y + · · · + l0 y = km      u + k m−1        u + · · · + k0 −
                                                                                 →
                                                                                 u.
dt n           dt n−1                       dt m           dt m−1
                                                                               (4.23)

    Equation (4.23) represents the system of Figure 4.13 in the space-phasor domain.
It is noted that the system input–output relationship in the space-phasor domain has
the same form as that for each subsystem in the abc-frame. Equation (4.23) pro-
vides a compact representation of the original three-phase system. It can be observed
that (4.23) possesses the same form as each of (4.17), (4.18), and (4.19). There-
fore, the space-phasor equations of a symmetrical, decoupled, linear, three-phase
system can be conveniently derived by replacing the time-domain variables with the
corresponding space-phasor variables in any set of equations corresponding to the
three phases.
    The foregoing procedure to transform the differential equations of a three-phase
system to space-phasor domain can also be readily applied to state-space equations,
as illustrated in Example 4.4.

   EXAMPLE 4.4           Space-Phasor State-Space Equations of a Three-Phase
   Circuit
   Figure 4.14 illustrates a simpliﬁed circuit diagram of a current-controlled three-
   phase VSC system of which each phase is interfaced with the corresponding
   phase of an AC system. The AC system is represented by a voltage source vsabc
   in series with three decoupled inductors, one per phase. The inductance of each
   inductor is Ls . In the circuit of Figure 4.14, vabc signiﬁes the voltage of the point
   of common coupling (PCC), and isabc and iabc represent the AC system current
   and the VSC current, respectively. Since, in practice, iabc contains harmonic
   components, the capacitors C are used to provide bypass paths for the harmonics
   and prevent them from penetrating into the AC system. It is assumed that the
   fundamental component of iabc can be controlled by a PWM scheme. This, in
   turn, enables the control of real and reactive power that the VSC system delivers
   to the AC system.
       Based on the aforementioned description of the circuit of Figure 4.14, iabc
   is the control variable whereas vabc and isabc are the state variables. Since there
   is no control over vsabc , it is regarded as the disturbance input. Depending on
86      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


                                                                Ls   vsa
                    ia    va                            isa




                                                                           −
                                                                           +
                                                                Ls   vsb
                    ib              vb                  isb
                                                                                  vn




                                                                           −
                                                                           +
                                                                Ls   vsc
                    ic                             vc   isc




                                                                           −
                                                                           +
                      C        C               C




                                       0
                    FIGURE 4.14 Three-phase circuit of Example 4.4.




     the application, the output is a combination of state variables. Selecting the
     common point of the capacitors, that is, node 0, as the reference voltage node,
     the voltage of the AC system neutral point is assumed to be vn (t). Thus, the
     following state-space equations can be written:

                                     dva
                                   C       = ia − isa ,                        (4.24)
                                      dt
                                     dvb
                                   C       = ib − isb ,                        (4.25)
                                      dt
                                     dvc
                                   C       = ic − isc ,                        (4.26)
                                      dt
                                      disa
                                   Ls       = va − vsa − vn ,                  (4.27)
                                       dt
                                      disb
                                   Ls       = vb − vsb − vn ,                  (4.28)
                                       dt
                                      disc
                                   Ls       = vc − vsc − vn .                  (4.29)
                                       dt

     Equations (4.24)–(4.26) are expressed in the space-phasor domain as

                                                →
                                               d−v  → −
                                                    −    →
                                           C       = i − is .                  (4.30)
                                                dt
                   SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                    87

                          Symmetrical, coupled, linear, three-phase system

   ua            Ya (s)                  H(s)     M(s)    M(s)          Ua(s)       ya
   ub            Yb(s)         =         M(s)     H(s)    M(s)          Ub(s)       yb
   uc            Yc(s)                   M(s)     M(s)    H(s)          Uc(s)       yc


   FIGURE 4.15 Block diagram of a symmetrical, coupled, linear, three-phase system.



   The space-phasor equivalent of (4.27)–(4.29) assumes a form slightly differ-
                                                         2π      4π
   ent from the original equations. Since (2/3)(ej0 + ej 3 + ej 3 ) ≡ 0, one con-
                                2π        4π
   cludes that (2/3)(ej0 vn + ej 3 vn + ej 3 vn ) ≡ 0. Therefore, vn is eliminated
   in the process of conversion from the abc-frame to the space-phasor domain,
   and

                                           →
                                           −
                                          d is
                                       Ls       v −−
                                                →
                                               =−  →
                                                   vs .                         (4.31)
                                           dt

4.3.2   Coupled Symmetrical Three-Phase Systems
Figure 4.15 represents a block diagram of a coupled symmetrical three-phase system.
In this section, we demonstrate that, despite the coupling, a space-phasor representa-
tion can be formulated for the system using a procedure similar to the one adopted for
the decoupled system of Figure 4.13. The coupled equations representing the system
of Figure 4.15 are

                   Ya (s) = H(s)Ua (s) + M(s)Ub (s) + M(s)Uc (s),
                   Yb (s) = M(s)Ua (s) + H(s)Ub (s) + M(s)Uc (s),
                   Yc (s) = M(s)Ua (s) + M(s)Ub (s) + H(s)Uc (s),                 (4.32)

where H(s) and M(s) are self- and mutual transfer functions, respectively. Since
ua + ub + uc ≡ 0, so is Ua + Ub + Uc ≡ 0. Therefore, (4.32) can be rewritten as

                                Ya (s) = [H(s) − M(s)]Ua (s),
                                Yb (s) = [H(s) − M(s)]Ub (s),
                                   Yc (s) = [H(s) − M(s)]Uc (s).                  (4.33)

The equation set (4.33) corresponds to the symmetrical decoupled three-phase system
of Figure 4.13 in which G(s) = H(s) − M(s). Therefore, based on the discussions in
Section 4.3.1, the transfer function from the input space phasor to the output space
phasor is also G(s) = H(s) − M(s).
88      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


     EXAMPLE 4.5            Space-Phasor Equations of a Mutually Coupled Three-
     Phase Inductor
     Consider the three-phase inductor of Example 4.4 (Fig. 4.14), where each induc-
     tor is mutually coupled with the other two inductors, and the mutual inductances
     are equal to M. Therefore, (4.31) is modiﬁed to
                                           →
                                           −
                                         d is
                              (Ls − M)         =− v −−
                                                  →    →vs .                   (4.34)
                                           dt


4.3.3    Asymmetrical Three-Phase Systems
The space-phasor system representation introduced in Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 cannot
be developed for asymmetrical three-phase systems. The reason is that in an asym-
metrical system no transfer function can be found to describe the output space phasor
as a function of the input space phasor. In other words, the real and imaginary com-
ponents of the output space phasor in an asymmetrical system are related to both the
real and imaginary components of the input space phasor, through different transfer
functions4 . Consequently, the modeling must be carried out in either the αβ-frame
or the dq-frame, as discussed in subsequent sections.

4.4     POWER IN THREE-WIRE THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS

In this section, based on the space-phasor concept we deﬁne real-, reactive-, and
apparent-power components exchanged with a three-wire, three-phase port. In con-
trast to the conventional phasor concept, the deﬁnitions of power components based
on the space-phasor theory are also applicable to dynamic and/or variable-frequency
scenarios.
    Consider the balanced three-phase network of Figure 4.16 whose terminal voltages
and currents are vabc and iabc , respectively. vabc and/or iabc are not necessarily bal-
anced, but ia + ib + ic = 0. The instantaneous total (real) power in the time domain
is expressed as
                         P(t) = va (t)ia (t) + vb (t)ib (t) + vc (t)ic (t).      (4.35)

In (4.35), vabc and iabc can be expressed in terms of their corresponding space phasors
based on (4.7). Thus,
                                          −   →         
                    P(t) = Re −   →
                                  v (t)ej0 Re i (t)ej0
                                                 −
                                                    →          
                                 +Re −→       2π            2π
                                      v (t)e−j 3 Re i (t)e−j 3
                                                 −
                                                    →          
                                 +Re −→       4π            4π
                                      v (t)e−j 3 Re i (t)e−j 3 .                 (4.36)

4 We will demonstrate this in Section 4.5.5, Example 4.7.
                                      POWER IN THREE-WIRE THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS          89




                      ia         va

                      ib         vb
                                                            N
                      ic         vc



                      FIGURE 4.16 A three-wire three-phase network.




Based on the identity Re{α}Re{β} = (Re{αβ} + Re{αβ∗ })/2, (4.36) is expressed as
                         → 
                          −                → 
                                            −
                 Re −v (t) i (t) + Re −
                     →                 →
                                       v (t) i ∗ (t)
        P(t) =
                                     2
                             −
                              →                    → 
                                                     −
                     Re −→
                         v (t) i (t)e−j 3 + Re −→
                                       4π
                                                v (t) i ∗ (t)
                 +
                                          2
                             −
                              →                    → 
                                                     −
                     Re −→
                         v (t) i (t)e−j 3 + Re −→
                                       8π
                                                v (t) i ∗ (t)
                 +                                                .
                                              2
                                                                                   (4.37)
                 4π         8π
Since ej0 + e−j 3 + e−j 3 ≡ 0, (4.37) is simpliﬁed to
                                      !                "
                                          3−→    →∗
                                                 −
                        P(t) = Re           v (t) i (t) .                          (4.38)
                                          2

It should be noted that (4.38) is developed with no assumption on the frequencies
or the amplitudes of vabc and iabc . The frequencies and amplitudes can assume any
arbitrary functions of time. Moreover, there is no requirement for the frequencies of
vabc and iabc to be equal. Furthermore, (4.38) is obtained with no assumption on the
harmonic contents of vabc and iabc , and it is valid under both transient and steady-state
conditions. The only assumption is that the port corresponds to a three-wire circuit,
that is, ia + ib + ic = 0.
    If vabc and iabc are distortion-free sinusoidal waveforms with constant ampli-
tudes and equal constant frequencies, (4.38) is reduced to the expression for the real
power in the conventional phasor analysis. This analogy is the main incentive behind
90      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


the deﬁnitions of the instantaneous reactive power and the instantaneous complex
power, as

                                            !                  "
                                                3−→    →
                                                       −
                                Q(t) = Im         v (t) i ∗ (t) ,              (4.39)
                                                2

                                                  3−→    →
                                                         −
                       S(t) = P(t) + jQ(t) =        v (t) i ∗ (t).             (4.40)
                                                  2

Under a steady-state, balanced, sinusoidal condition, the instantaneous reactive power
assumes the same expression as that for the conventional reactive power.

     EXAMPLE 4.6           Instantaneous Power Absorbed by a Three-Phase
     Inductor Bank
     Consider a set of three inductors with no mutual couplings, as shown in
     Figure 4.17. The inductors carry the balanced three-phase current iabc . The
     instantaneous power absorbed by the inductors is formulated as follows.
        Since the system is decoupled and symmetrical, the following space-phasor
     equation is valid for the inductor voltage:

                                         →
                                         −
                              −
                              →         d i
                              v (t) = L     .
                                         dt



                                                    L

                                                  + va −
                      ia


                                                  + vb −
                      ib


                                                  + vc −
                      ic



              FIGURE 4.17 Balanced three-phase inductors of Example 4.6.
                                               αβ-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL       91

   Based on (4.38), the instantaneous real power of the inductor set is

                                                          −
                                                             →
                                               3L               →∗
                                                            d i −
                                PL (t) =                Re       i   .          (4.41)
                                                2            dt

                                  →
                                  −                  →
                                                     −                        →
                                                                              −
   Under a steady-state condition, i (t) = iejωt , d i /dt = i(jω)ejωt , and i ∗ =
  ie−jωt . Thus,
                                #       $#         $  3L        
                       3L                   
        PL (t) =                Re jωiejωt
                                              ie −jωt
                                                        =      Re jωi2 ≡ 0,
                        2                                   2

   which is consistent with the fact that an ideal inductor does not absorb or deliver
   real power in the steady state.


4.5 αβ-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL
OF THREE-PHASE SIGNALS AND SYSTEMS

Previous sections introduced the concept of space phasor for representation of three-
phase signals, and also demonstrated that a symmetrical three-phase system can be
described by a set of space-phasor equations. It was noted that a space phasor is
a complex-valued function of time that can be conveniently expressed in the polar
coordinate system. Such a representation is particularly useful when dynamics of
amplitude and phase of the system variables are of interest. However, for con-
trol design and implementation purposes, it is preferred to map space phasors and
space-phasor equations in the Cartesian coordinate system where one deals with
real-valued functions of time. Moreover, as explained in Section 4.3.3, an asymmet-
rical three-phase system cannot be directly expressed in the space-phasor domain.
Hence, in this section we introduce the mapping of a space phasor onto the Carte-
sian coordinate system, which is commonly referred to as αβ-frame in the technical
literature.


4.5.1   αβ-Frame Representation of a Space Phasor
Consider the space phasor

                   →
                   −       2  j0          2π            4π
                                                                  
                   f (t) =    e fa (t) + ej 3 fb (t) + ej 3 fc (t) ,                 (4.42)
                           3
                        →
                        −
where fa + fb + fc ≡ 0. f (t) can be decomposed into its real and imaginary com-
ponents as
                                     →
                                     −
                                     f (t) = fα (t) + jfβ (t),                       (4.43)
92      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES

                                                                  →
                                                                  −
where fα and fβ are referred to as α- and β-axis components of f (t), respectively.
                 →
                 −
Substituting for f (t) from (4.43) in (4.42) and equating the corresponding real and
imaginary parts of both sides of the resultant, we deduce
                                                       ⎡            ⎤
                              %            &               fa (t)
                                  fα (t)           2 ⎢         ⎥
                                               =     C⎢
                                                      ⎣
                                                        fb (t) ⎥ ,
                                                               ⎦                 (4.44)
                                  fβ (t)           3
                                                        fc (t)

where
                                  ⎡                   ⎤
                                      1 − 21 − 21
                           C=⎣            √     √ ⎦.                             (4.45)
                                      0    2
                                            3
                                              − 2
                                                 3




Equation (4.44) can be graphically represented by the abc-frame to αβ-frame sig-
nal transformer of Figure 4.18. The signal transformer of Figure 4.18 is an equiv-
alent of that of Figure 4.2. Based on (4.7), fabc can also be expressed in terms of
fαβ as

                         -                .    
           fa (t) = Re     fα (t) + jfβ (t) e−j0 = fα (t),

                      -                                      √
                                       . −j 2π     1           3
           fb (t) = Re fα (t) + jfβ (t) e 3 = − fα (t) +          fβ (t),
                                                    2         2
                      -                                      √
                                       . −j 4π     1           3
           fc (t) = Re fα (t) + jfβ (t) e    3   = − fα (t) −     fβ (t).        (4.46)
                                                    2         2




                                      Equation (4.44)

               fa (t)                          abc
                                                                        fα (t)
               fb (t)

                                                      αβ                fβ (t)
               fc (t)

             FIGURE 4.18 The abc-frame to αβ-frame signal transformer.
                                        αβ-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL       93


                                    Equation (4.47)
                                                                  fa (t)
                                             αβ
               fα (t)
                                                                  fb (t)
               fβ (t)
                                                 abc              fc (t)

             FIGURE 4.19 The αβ-frame to abc-frame signal transformer

   Equation (4.46) can be written in the following matrix form:
               ⎡            ⎤   ⎡            ⎤
                   fa (t)           %
                                    1   0&    %        &
                               √ ⎥ f (t)
               ⎢ f (t) ⎥ ⎢            α         fα (t)
               ⎣ b ⎦=⎢     −      ⎥
                             1  3           T
                         ⎣ 2 2√ ⎦ fβ (t) = C fβ (t) ,                         (4.47)
                 fc (t)    −1 − 3   2    2

where C is deﬁned by (4.45) and superscript T denotes matrix transposition. Simi-
larly, (4.47) can be represented by the αβ-frame to abc-frame signal transformer of
Figure 4.19, which is equivalent to the block diagram of Figure 4.3.
    Equations (4.44) and (4.47) introduce the matrix transformations from the abc-
frame to the αβ-frame, and vice versa, respectively. Considering Figure 4.1, one can
                                                       →
                                                       −
conclude that fα (t) and fβ (t) are the projections of f (t) on the real axis and the
imaginary axis, respectively. Thus, we can rename the real and the imaginary axes in
Figure 4.1 to α-axis and β-axis, respectively, as shown in Figure 4.20.




                                                            f (t)




            Radius = f (t)




              FIGURE 4.20 The αβ-frame components of a space phasor.
94      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


The following relationships are deduced from Figure 4.20:
                                                       /
                                           f (t) =        fα2 (t) + fβ2 (t),             (4.48)
                                      fα (t)       fα (t)
                      cos[θ(t)] =            =/                  ,                        (4.49)
                                      
                                      f (t)    f 2 (t) + f 2 (t)
                                                            α            β

                                          fβ (t)        fβ (t)
                       sin[θ(t)] =               =/                   .                   (4.50)
                                          f (t)    f 2 (t) + f 2 (t)
                                                             α           β


Alternatively, (4.49) and (4.50) can be written as

                                 fα (t) = f (t) cos[θ(t)],                               (4.51)
                                 fβ (t) = f (t) sin[θ(t)],                               (4.52)

that is, fα and fβ are sinusoidal functions of time with the amplitude f and the
frequency ω = dθ/dt.
   It can be veriﬁed that
                             %        &       %        &%        &       %        &
                     2           fα               10        fα               fα
                       CCT                =                          =                .   (4.53)
                     3           fβ               01        fβ               fβ

Equation (4.53) can be used in conjunction with (4.47) to derive the αβ-frame dynamic
equations of a three-phase system from the abc-frame equations; the procedure is
illustrated in Section 4.5.5. It can also be shown that
                      ⎡   ⎤    ⎡              ⎤⎡ ⎤ ⎡ ⎤
                       fa         1 − 21 − 21   fa   fa
               2 T ⎢ ⎥ 2⎢                     ⎥⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
                 C C ⎣ fb ⎦ = ⎢  − 1 − ⎥ ⎣ fb ⎦ = ⎣ fb ⎦ .
                                   1        1
                                                                                          (4.54)
               3             3 ⎣ 21 1 2 ⎦
                       fc        −2 −2 1        fc   fc
                                                 
                                              fa +fb +fc ≡0


Equations (4.54) and (4.44) can be used to transform a set of equations in the αβ-frame
into the corresponding sets of abc-frame equations.


4.5.2   Realization of Signal Generators/Conditioners in αβ-Frame
For implementation purposes, the systems and signals have to be expressed in terms of
real-valued functions, that is, in αβ-frame. In this section, we seek equivalent block
diagrams for (i) the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Section 4.2.2 and (ii) the
three-phase signal generator of Section 4.2.3.
                                                 αβ-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL           95


   fα (t)
                                                                  –
   fβ (t)                                                X                          f a′ (t)

                         sin(.)          X                                          f β′ (t)
   φ(t)
                                                         X
   A(t)
                                                    X
                         cos(.)          X
                                                    X

FIGURE 4.21 Block diagram of a space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler in αβ-frame, equivalent
to Figure 4.4.



4.5.2.1 Space-Phasor Phase-Shifter/Scaler in αβ-Frame Section 4.2.2 intro-
duced the space-phasor phase-shifter/scalers of Figure 4.4 and 4.5 and discussed
their applications. To ﬁnd their corresponding equivalent blocks in αβ-frame, we use
the Euler’s identity, ej(·) = cos(·) + jsin(·), and deduce
                   %             &           %                    &%          &
                       fα (t)              cos φ(t) − sin φ(t)        fα (t)
                                     = A(t)                                     .      (4.55)
                       fβ (t)              sin φ(t) cos φ(t)          fβ (t)

In the αβ-frame, a phase-shifter/scaler equivalent to that of Figure 4.4 can be realized
based on (4.55), as illustrated in Figure 4.21. The phase-sihfter/scaler of Figure 4.21
can further be augmented with an abc- to αβ-frame signal transformer at the input,
and an αβ- to abc-frame signal transformer at the output, as shown in Figure 4.22.
Thus, the space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler of Figure 4.22 is equivalent to that of
Figure 4.5.

4.5.2.2 Three-Phase Signal Generator in αβ-Frame Section 4.2.3 introduced
the controllable-frequency/amplitude three-phase signal generator of Figure 4.10 and
discussed its application. To ﬁnd an equivalent signal generator in the αβ-frame, the
Euler’s identity ej(·) = cos(·) + jsin(·) is used again. The block diagram of the signal
generator in the αβ-frame is shown in Figure 4.23.


4.5.3       Formulation of Power in αβ-Frame
Section 4.4 presented the space-phasor expressions for the instantaneous real- and
reactive-power components. To obtain equivalent expressions in terms of αβ-frame
                                                                         →
                                                                         −
                                                  →
variables, we substitute in (4.38) and (4.40) for −
                                                  v (t) = vα + jvβ and i ∗ (t) =
96         SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES



                 Equation                      Equation (4.55)                     Equation
                  (4.44)                                                            (4.47)
                                   f α (t)
     f a (t)          abc                                              f ′a (t)               f a′ (t)
                                   f β (t)                                          αβ
     f b (t)                                                          f ′β (t)                f b′ (t)
     f c (t)             αβ                     Phase-shifter/                       abc      f c′ (t)
                                                   scaler
     φ(t)
     A(t)


FIGURE 4.22 Block diagram of a space-phasor phase-shfter/scaler in αβ-frame, equivalent
to Figure 4.5


iα − jiβ , and obtain

                                              3-                            .
                                   P(t) =       vα (t)iα (t) + vβ (t)iβ (t)                     (4.56)
                                              2

and

                                   3-                            .
                       Q(t) =        −vα (t)iβ (t) + vβ (t)iα (t) .                             (4.57)
                                   2

4.5.4       Control in αβ-Frame
Figure 4.24 illustrates the generic control block diagram of a three-phase VSC system
in αβ-frame. The control plant may consist of three-phase electric machines, VSCs,



                                                  Equation (4.55)                  Equation
                                                                                    (4.47)
                     f α (t) = 1                                        f a′ (t)              f a′ (t)
                                                                                     αβ
                     f β (t) = 0                                        f β′ (t)              f b′ (t)
                                   θ (t)     φ (t) Phase-shifter/                     abc     f c′ (t)
     ω(t)        ∫                                    scaler
      θ0
     A(t)


FIGURE 4.23 Block diagram of a controllable-frequency/amplitude three-phase signal gen-
erator in αβ-frame, equivalent to Figure 4.10.
                                             αβ-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL      97




FIGURE 4.24 Block diagram of the αβ-frame control scheme of a typical three-phase system.


interface reactors, transformers, harmonic ﬁlters, loads, and sources. The control
input uabc and the output yabc are identiﬁed on the basis of the application and
control/operation requirements. Commonly, uabc and yabc are the three-phase PWM
modulating signal and a three-phase voltage or current, respectively. The input–output
relationship is assumed to be described by a matrix transfer function G(s)5 and the
objective is to control yabc by uabc , in the presence of the disturbance input dabc .
   To exercise the control in αβ-frame, yabc is measured and transformed to equiv-
alent αβ-frame signals. Dynamics of the transducers, if not negligible, can also be
included in G(s). Moreover, if the disturbance input is measurable, it can be trans-
formed to the αβ-frame and taken into account as a feed-forward signal. Based on
the reference, feedback, and feed-forward signals, a set of compensators generate
the control signals uα and uβ that are transformed back to uabc and delivered to the
actual three-phase control plant.
   To design the compensators, the plant dynamics must be formulated in αβ-frame,
as illustrated in Figure 4.25. The αβ-frame description of a symmetrical plant is
provided by (4.58) and (4.59), and the equations represent two decoupled subsystems
that can be independently controlled. Thus, as shown in Figure 4.24, two decoupled
compensators, kα (s) and kβ (s), are used to control the α- and β-axis subsystems.
   The αβ-frame description of an asymmetrical system represents a multi-input–
multi-output (MIMO) plant in which the α- and β-axis subsystems are coupled.

5 Without loss of generality, a linear control plant has been assumed here.
98      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


                                        Plant description in the αβ -frame
                Feed-forward signals               da db dc
                                   dα   abc

                                   dβ
                                        αβ

                Control signals
                                   uα   αβ    ua    Original   ya
                                                     plant
                                              ub               yb
                                   uβ                G(s)
                                              uc               yc
                                        abc

                Feedback signals

                                   yα   abc

                                   yβ
                                        αβ


                   FIGURE 4.25 System description in the αβ-frame.


Consequently, in general, the compensators cannot be split, and a MIMO compen-
sator is inevitable. However, under special conditions, the α- and β-axes dynamics
may be decoupled by using appropriate feed-forward techniques. A number of these
techniques are discussed in the subsequent chapters. Regardless of the plant prop-
erties, the compensator design task must take into consideration (i) the stability of
each subsystem, (ii) disturbance rejection capability, and (iii) capability to track the
reference commands yαref and yβref with small errors.
    It should be noted that the control system of Figure 4.24 is usually used in conjunc-
tion with an outer control loop, in a nested loop structure, to control other variables.
For example, in a grid-connected VSC system where yabc = iabc is the VSC current,
iαref and iβref are determined according to (4.56) and (4.57) to control the required
real- and reactive-power components exchanged with the AC side.
    In should be noted that yαref and yβref , in general, are sinusoidal functions of
time. Therefore, to ensure satisfactory tracking performance, either the closed-loop
control system must have an adequately large bandwidth or the compensators must
include complex-conjugate poles at the frequency of the commands. Consequently,
the control system of Figure 4.24 is not the best candidate for variable-frequency
applications. For such applications, a dq-frame-based control is usually adopted. The
dq-frame-based modeling and control are discussed in Section 4.6.


4.5.5   Representation of Systems in αβ-Frame
The αβ-frame control of a three-phase VSC system, based on the generic block dia-
gram of Figure 4.24, requires that the control plant equations expressing the outputs in
                                      αβ-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL                 99

terms of the control and disturbance inputs, which is the model of the control plant, be
developed in the αβ-frame to enable the design and optimization of the compensators.
The following section describes the modeling procedures.

4.5.5.1 Symmetrical Three-Phase Systems As discussed in Section 4.3.1, the
space-phasor equations of a decoupled symmetrical three-phase system can be di-
rectly derived from the abc-frame equations corresponding to only one phase of the
system. It was further demonstrated in Section 4.3.2 that, even if the symmetrical
three-phase system is coupled, an equivalent decoupled system representation can be
deduced for it. Therefore, in αβ-frame terms, it can be asserted that in a symmet-
rical three-phase system the α- and β-axis components of the output space phasor
are decoupled and controlled by α- and β-frame components of the input space pha-
sor, respectively. Hence, the original three-phase system can be considered as two
decoupled subsystems, that is, the α-axis and β-axis subsystems, while the transfer
functions of both subsystems are the same. To verify this, let us consider (4.23) in
which we substitute for −→y = yα + jyβ and −  →u = uα + juβ , and split the real and
imaginary parts as

dn              d n−1                            dm              d m−1
     yα + l n−1        yα + · · · + l 0 y α = km      uα + k m−1        uα + · · · + k0 uα ,
dt n            dt n−1                           dt m            dt m−1
                                                                                       (4.58)
 d n             d n−1                            d m             d m−1
     yβ + ln−1 n−1 yβ + · · · + l0 yβ = km m uβ + km−1 m−1 uβ + · · · + k0 uβ .
dt n            dt                               dt              dt
                                                                                       (4.59)


Equations (4.58) and (4.59) indicate that a balanced three-phase linear system, which
is described by three dynamic equations, can be equivalently described by two dy-
namic equations. Based on (4.58) and (4.59), one can control uα and uβ to control
the three-phase system. This indicates that in the αβ-frame we have to implement
only two controllers instead of three, that is, one for the α-axis subsystem, (4.58), and
the other for the β-axis subsystem, (4.59). The control requires transformation of the
feedback signals from the abc-frame to the αβ-frame, and transformation of the con-
trol signals back from the αβ-frame to the abc-frame. However, these transformations
are algebraic and thus of low computational burden.

4.5.5.2 Asymmetrical Three-Phase Systems As discussed in Section 4.3.3, no
space-phasor representation can be developed for an asymmetrical three-phase sys-
tem. In an asymmetrical system, the α- and β-axis components of the output space
phasor are coupled to both components of the input space phasor. Consequently, the
α- and β-axis subsystems are coupled, and the system represented in αβ-frame is a
MIMO system. Moreover, the transfer functions of the two subsystems are different.
Consequently, the control design task for an asymmetrical three-phase system is more
involved than that for a symmetrical system.
100          SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


    EXAMPLE 4.7                       Space-Phasor Equations of Three Mutually Coupled
    Inductors
    Consider an asymmetrical three-phase system governed by the following matrix
    equation:
                                  ⎡   ⎤ ⎡              ⎤ ⎡ ⎤
                                   va      Ls Mab Mac        ia
                                  ⎢v ⎥ ⎢M L M ⎥ d ⎢i ⎥
                                  ⎣ b ⎦ = ⎣ ab s    bc ⎦    ⎣ b⎦,                                                (4.60)
                                                         dt
                                   vc      Mac Mbc Ls        ic

    which represents three mutually coupled inductors with unequal mutual in-
    ductances. To derive the αβ-frame equations, based on (4.47), the abc-frame
    voltage and current vectors are expressed in αβ-frame. Hence,
                                                   ⎡          ⎤
                                  %        &       Ls Mab Mac                          %        &
                              T
                                      vα         ⎢            ⎥ d                  T
                                                                                           iα
                         C                     = ⎣ Mab Ls Mbc ⎦                C
                                      vβ                        dt                         iβ
                                                   Mac Mbc Ls
                                                       ⎡           ⎤
                                                       Ls Mab Mac        % &
                                                     ⎢ M L M ⎥ T d iα
                                                   = ⎣ ab s     bc ⎦ C       ,                                   (4.61)
                                                                       dt iβ
                                                       Mac Mbc Ls

    where C is given by (4.45). Premultiplying both sides of (4.61) by (2/3)C and
    using the identity (4.53) at the left-hand side of the resultant, we deduce
                                               ⎡   ⎤
                     %        &         Ls Mab Mac        % &
                         vα        2 ⎢             ⎥    d  iα
                                  = C ⎣ Mab Ls Mbc ⎦ CT       .                                                  (4.62)
                         vβ        3                    dt iβ
                                        Mac Mbc Ls

    Substituting in (4.62) for C and CT , based on (4.45), one deduces
%        &       ⎡                                           √                             ⎤        %        &
              2 2 Ls − (Mab + Mac ) + 2 Mbc                   2 (Mab − Mac ) ⎦ d
                 3                    1                        3
    vα                                                                                                  iα
             = ⎣      √                                                                                      .   (4.63)
    vβ                                                                                                  iβ
                       2 (Mab − Mac )                          2 (Ls − Mbc )
              3         3                                      3               dt

    Equation (4.63) indicates that vα and vβ the functions of both iα and iβ , through
    different transfer functions. However, if the mutual inductances are identical and
    equal to M, the three inductors constitute a symmetrical (coupled) three-phase
    system, and (4.63) is simpliﬁed to
                     %        &        %                         &        %        &
                         vα                (Ls − M)     0            d        iα
                                  =                                                    ,                         (4.64)
                         vβ                    0    (Ls − M)         dt       iβ
        dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                 101

   which represents two identical decoupled subsystems in αβ-frame. Equa-
   tion (4.64) is αβ-frame equivalent of the space-phasor equation (4.34), Ex-
   ample 4.5.



4.6 dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL
OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS

Section 4.5.4 presented the structure of a three-phase control system in αβ-frame (Fig.
4.24), for which the compensators are designed based on the αβ-frame description of
the control plant, as shown in Figure 4.25. The control in αβ-frame has the feature
of reducing the number of required control loops from three to two. However, the
reference, feedback, and feed-forward signals are in general sinusoidal functions of
time. Therefore, to achieve a satisfactory performance and small steady-state errors,
the compensators may need to be of high orders, and the closed-loop bandwidths must
be adequately larger than the frequency of the reference commands. Consequently, the
compensator design is not a straightforward task, especially if the operating frequency
is variable. The dq-frame-based control offers a solution to this problem.
    In dq-frame, the signals assume DC waveforms under steady-state conditions. This,
in turn, permits utilization of compensators with simpler structures and lower dynamic
orders. Moreover, zero steady-state tracking error can be achieved by including inte-
gral terms in the compensators. A dq-frame representation of a three-phase system is
also more suitable for analysis and control design tasks. For example, the abc-frame
representation of a salient-pole synchronous machine includes time-varying self- and
mutual inductances. However, if the machine equations are transformed to a proper
dq-frame, the time-varying inductances manifest themselves as constant parameters.
The dq-frame representation and control of signals and systems are discussed in the
following subsections.


4.6.1  dq-Frame Representation of a Space Phasor
                     →
                     −
For the space phasor f = fα + jfβ , the αβ- to dq-frame transformation is deﬁned
by


                   fd + jfq = (fα + jfβ )e−jε(t) ,                              (4.65)


                                        →
                                        −
which is equivalent to a phase shift in f (t) by the angle −ε(t). The dq- to αβ-frame
transformation can be obtained by multiplying both sides of (4.65) by ejε(t) . Thus,


                            fα + jfβ = (fd + jfq )ejε(t) .                      (4.66)
102     SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES

                                                                               →
                                                                               −
To highlight the usefulness of the transformation given by (4.65), assume that f has
the following general form:
                                                  -          .
                       →
                       −                         j θ + ω(τ)dτ
                       f (t) = fα + jfβ = f (t)e 0             ,

where ω(t) is the (time-varying) frequency and θ0 is the initial phase angle of the
                                    →
                                    −
three-phase signal corresponding to f (t). If ε(t) is chosen as
                                                       
                                   ε(t) = ε0 +             ω(τ)dτ,

                                                    →
                                                    −
then based on (4.65) the dq-frame representation of f (t) becomes

                                 fd + jfq = f (t)ej(θ0 −ε0 ) ,

which is stationary and, therefore, the constituents of its corresponding three-phase
signal are DC quantities. Note that θ(t) and ε(t) are not necessarily equal, but
dθ(t)/dt = dε(t)/dt must be ensured.
   To better describe the dq-frame transformation, let us rewrite (4.66) as

                  →
                  −
                  f = fd (1 + 0 · j)ejε(t) + fq (0 + 1 · j)ejε(t) .                    (4.67)

                                                     →
                                                     −
An interpretation of (4.67) is that the vector f is represented by its components,
that is, fd and fq , in an orthogonal coordinate system whose axes are along the unit
vectors (1 + 0 · j)ejε(t) and (0 + 1 · j)ejε(t) . In turn, (1 + 0 · j) and (0 + 1 · j) are the
unit vectors along the α-axis and the β-axis of the αβ-frame, respectively. Therefore,
                                                        →
                                                        −
as illustrated in Figure 4.26, one can consider f as a vector represented by the
components fd and fq in a coordinate system that is rotated by ε(t) with respect to the
αβ-frame. We refer to this rotated coordinate system as α dq-frame. For the reason
given above, the dq-frame is also known as rotating reference frame, in the technical
literature. Usually, the rotational speed of the dq-frame is selected to be equal to that
    →
    −
of f .
    Based on the Euler’s identity ej(·) = cos(·) + j sin(·), (4.65) can be written as
                             %            &                 %   &
                                 fd (t)                  fα (t)
                                              = R [ε(t)]          ,                    (4.68)
                                 fq (t)                  fβ (t)

where
                                              %                       &
                                                   cos ε(t) sin ε(t)
                           R [ε(t)] =                                   .              (4.69)
                                                  − sin ε(t) cos ε(t)
        dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                                   103


                                     β                                  ω(t)
                 q
                                                                                        ω(t)
                                                                                 δ(t)          d
                                                        f(t)
                           fβ (t)


                                                                       fd (t)           ε(t)
                      fq (t)
                                                                                               α
                                                             f α (t)
                                                                                θ(t) = θ 0 + ∫ω (τ )dτ




                  FIGURE 4.26 αβ- and dq-frame coordinate systems.




   Similarly, the dq- to αβ-frame transformation (4.66) can be rewritten as

                              %            &                    %   &
                                  fα (t)           −1
                                                             fd (t)
                                               = R [ε(t)]
                                  fβ (t)                     fq (t)
                                                           %        &
                                                             fd (t)
                                               = R [−ε(t)]            ,                            (4.70)
                                                             fq (t)


where
                                                        %                       &
                                                            cos ε(t) − sin ε(t)
                 R−1 [ε(t)] = R [−ε(t)] =                                         .                (4.71)
                                                            sin ε(t) cos ε(t)


It can also be veriﬁed that


                                   R−1 [ε(t)] = RT [ε(t)] .                                        (4.72)
104      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


A direct transformation from the abc-frame to the dq-frame can be obtained by sub-
stitution of [fα fβ ]T from (4.44) in (4.68), as

                                                          ⎡   ⎤
                          %            &               fa (t)
                              fd (t)        2        ⎢        ⎥
                                           = T[ε(t)] ⎣ fb (t) ⎦ ,             (4.73)
                              fq (t)        3
                                                       fc (t)

where
                                ⎡                                    ⎤
                               cos [ε(t)] cos ε(t) − 2π   cos ε(t) − 4π
                             ⎢               
                                                      3
                                                            
                                                                      3
                                                                        ⎥
        T[ε(t)] = R[ε(t)]C = ⎣                                           ⎦ . (4.74)
                               sin [ε(t)] sin ε(t) − 3 sin ε(t) − 3
                                                     2π              4π




Similarly, a direct transformation from the dq-frame to the abc-frame can be obtained
by substituting for [fα fβ ]T from (4.70) in (4.47) as

                          ⎡        ⎤
                            fa (t)          %        &
                          ⎢ f (t) ⎥       T
                                              fd (t)
                          ⎣ b ⎦ = T [ε(t)] f (t) ,                            (4.75)
                                               q
                            fc (t)


where

                                            ⎡                          ⎤
                                        cos [ε(t)]      sin [ε(t)]
                                   ⎢                              
                                   ⎢                              2π ⎥ ⎥
          T[ε(t)]T = CT R[−ε(t)] = ⎢ cos ε(t) − 3 sin ε(t) − 3 ⎥ .
                                                  2π
                                                                              (4.76)
                                   ⎣                              ⎦
                                     cos ε(t) − 4π 3 sin ε(t) − 3
                                                                  4π




   Based on Figure 4.26, one deduces

                                                      /
                                           f (t) =    fd2 (t) + fq2 (t),     (4.77)
                                       fd (t)       fd (t)
                      cos[δ(t)] =             =/                 ,            (4.78)
                                       
                                       f (t)     f (t) + f 2 (t)
                                                  2
                                                          d        q

                                       fq (t)        fq (t)
                       sin[δ(t)] =            =/                   ,          (4.79)
                                       f (t)    f 2 (t) + f 2 (t)
                                                          d        q

                                                      θ(t) = ε(t) + δ(t).     (4.80)
        dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                          105

It can be veriﬁed that
                             %        &       %        &%        &       %        &
                      2 T        fd               10        fd               fd
                        TT                =                          =                .   (4.81)
                      3          fq               01        fq               fq

Equation (4.81) can be used in conjunction with (4.75) to formulate dq-frame equa-
tions for a three-phase system, based on abc-frame equations. It can also be shown
that
                      ⎡ ⎤         ⎡              ⎤⎡ ⎤ ⎡ ⎤
                        fa           1 − 21 − 21    fa        fa
                2 T ⎢ ⎥ 2⎢        ⎢
                                                 ⎥⎢ ⎥ ⎢ ⎥
                                                 ⎥
                  T T ⎣ f b ⎦ = ⎣ − 2 1 − 2 ⎦ ⎣ fb ⎦ = ⎣ f b ⎦ .
                                      1        1
                                                                             (4.82)
                3               3
                         fc         −2 −2 1
                                      1   1         f c       f c
                                                      
                                              fa +fb +fc ≡0

Equations (4.82) and (4.73) can be used to transform a set of dq-frame equations to
an equivalent set of equations in abc-frame.

4.6.2   Formulation of Power in dq-Frame
Section 4.4 presented the space-phasor expressions for the instantaneous real- and
reactive-power components. In this section, we derive analogous expressions in terms
of dq-frame variables. Based on (4.66), we substitute for −→v (t) = (vd + jvq )ejε(t) and
→∗
−                     −jε(t)
 i (t) = (id − jiq )e        in (4.38) and (4.40), and deduce

                                      3-                           .
                          P(t) =        vd (t)id (t) + vq (t)iq (t)                       (4.83)
                                      2

and

                                  3-                            .
                         Q(t) =     −vd (t)iq (t) + vq (t)id (t) .                        (4.84)
                                  2

Equations (4.83) and (4.84) suggest that if vq = 0, the real- and reactive-power
components are proportional to id and iq , respectively. This property is widely em-
ployed in the control of grid-connected three-phase VSC systems, as discussed in
Chapter 8.

4.6.3   Control in dq-Frame
Figure 4.27 illustrates the generic control block diagram of a three-phase VSC system
in dq-frame. The control system of Figure 4.27 is an extension of its αβ-frame coun-
terpart, that of Figure 4.24, in which the feedback, feed-forward, and control signals
are, in general, sinusoidal functions of time. Therefore, to enable the compensators to
process DC rather than sinusoidal signals, we alter the control system of Figure 4.24
106        SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


                                                 Plant description in the dq-frame

                                                            Plant description in the αβ -frame
  Feed-forward signals
                                   Equation (4.68)        Equation (4.44) da db dc
                              dd                     dα       abc
                                            αβ
                              dq                     dβ
                                      dq
                                                              αβ

               compensators            ε(t)               Equation (4.47)
                                   Equation (4.70)                  ua                 ya
       ydref      kd (s)      ud                     uα       αβ            Original
                                      dq                                     plant
                                                                    ub                 yb
                              uq                     uβ                      G (s)
      yqref                                 αβ                      uc                 yc
                  kq (s)                                      abc

                                       ε (t)              Equation (4.44)
                                   Equation (4.68)
                              yd                     yα       abc
                                            αβ
                              yq                     yβ
                                       dq
                                                              αβ

        Feedback signals               ε (t)

               FIGURE 4.27 A typical three-phase control system in the dq-frame.



by cascading each abc- to αβ-frame signal transformer by an αβ- to dq-frame signal
transformer. Thus, the compensators process (DC quantities) ddq and ydq , and pro-
vide the (DC) control signals udq . Finally, udq is transformed back to the αβ-frame
by means of a dq- to αβ-frame signal transformer. Hence, the equivalent control plant
in dq-frame has the inputs udq , the disturbances ddq , and the outputs ydq .
                                              represents the angle for the αβ/dq-frame
    In the control system of Figure 4.27, ε(t)
transformations. In general, ε(t) = ε0 + ω(τ)dτ, where ω(t) is the frequency and
ε0 is a constant. In the special case of a constant-frequency VSC system, ω(t) is equal
to the AC system operating frequency, for example, ω0 , and ε(t) = ε0 + ω0 t. There
are strict choices for ε(t) in some speciﬁc applications. For example,

      r In a grid-connected VSC system, the real- and reactive-power components ex-
        changed between the VSC and the grid become proportional to the d- and q-axis
        components of the converter current, respectively, if ε(t) is made equal to the
        angle of the grid voltage space phasor. As discussed in Chapter 8, the angle of
        the grid voltage is estimated and provided by a phase-locked loop (PLL) [49].
        In this case, the reference commands idref and iqref are the outputs of the real-
        and reactive-power compensators, respectively.
      r In an asynchronous machine drive, the goal is to regulate the machine ﬂux at
        a constant value and to control the torque dynamically. In dq-frame, the ﬂux
          dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                107

     and torque are nonlinear functions of both the d- and q-axis components of
     the stator current, that is, isd and isq . However, as discussed in Chapter 10, if
     ε(t) is equal to the angle of the rotor ﬂux space phasor, the ﬂux and torque
     become decoupled and proportional to isd and isq , respectively. The rotor ﬂux
     is not measurable and, consequently, its angle is obtained based on estimation
     techniques [43]. The reference commands, that is, isdref and isqref , are the out-
     puts of the ﬂux and torque control loops, respectively. This control method
     is referred to as vector control or ﬁeld-oriented control, in the technical lite-
     rature.
   r The vector-control strategy is also applicable to a synchronous machine [43].
     However, in the case of a synchronous machine, to decouple the machine ﬂux
     and torque, ε(t) is chosen to be equal to the rotor electrical angle, which can
     be obtained from a shaft encoder or through an estimation process [50–52].
     Similar to the case of an asynchronous machine drive, the machine ﬂux and
     torque become proportional to isd and isq , respectively.



4.6.4     Representation of Systems in dq-Frame
The dq-frame control of a three-phase VSC system, based on the generic block dia-
gram of Figure 4.27, requires that the control plant equations expressing the outputs
in terms of control and disturbance inputs, that is, the model of the control plant, be
developed in dq-frame, to enable the design and optimization of the compensators.
The next section describes the modeling procedures.

4.6.4.1 Derivation of dq-Frame Model from Space-Phasor Equations As dis-
cussed in Section 4.3, the space-phasor equations of symmetrical three-phase systems
can be developed by inspection of abc-frame equations. Most VSC systems treated
in this book belong to this class of symmetrical systems. Given the space-phasor
equations, a dq-frame model can be developed based on the following steps:
                                    → −
   r In the space-phasor equations, − y , and −
                                    d,→         →u are, respectively, substituted by
     →
     −                      −
                            →
      d = (d + jd )e , y = (y + jy )e , and −
                d
                      jε(t)
                      q                d
                                           jε(t)
                                             q
                                                     →u = (u + ju )ejε(t) .
                                                                  d      q
   r If encountered, the derivative dε/dt in the equations is replaced by ω.
   r The resultant set of equations is rearranged in terms of dd + jdq , yd + jyq , and
     ud + juq .
   r The equations are decomposed into the real and imaginary components.
   r ε(t) is deﬁned as a new state variable for which the state-space equation is
        dε/dt = ω(t), where ω(t) is a new control input. Note that this step is not nec-
        essary if ω(t) is a constant parameter.

Examples 4.8 and 4.9 illustrate the steps.
108    SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


  EXAMPLE 4.8                dq-Frame Model of the Three-Phase System of
  Example 4.4
  Consider the circuit of Figure 4.14 for which the space-phasor equations are
                                                               →
                                                               −
                                               →
  given by (4.30) and (4.31). Substituting for −
                                               v = vdq ejε(t) , i = idq ejε(t) , and
  →
  −
  is = isdq ejε(t) in (4.30), we obtain

                       d #           $ #          $ #           $
                   C       vdq ejε(t) = idq ejε(t) − isdq ejε(t) ,              (4.85)
                       dt

  where fdq = fd + jfq . Equation (4.85) can be rewritten as
                      
                dvdq               0     1        0 1          0 1
              C            ejε(t) + jωvdq ejε(t) = idq ejε(t) − isdq ejε(t) ,   (4.86)
                 dt

  where

                                         dε
                                            = ω(t).                             (4.87)
                                         dt

  Eliminating ejε(t) from both sides of (4.86) and decomposing the resultant into
  the real and imaginary parts, we conclude that

                                 dvd
                               C     = Cω(t)vq + id − isd ,                     (4.88)
                                  dt
                                 dvq
                               C     = −Cω(t)vd + iq − isq .                    (4.89)
                                  dt

  Following a similar procedure for (4.31), we obtain

                                 disd
                              Ls      = Ls ω(t)isq + vd − vsd ,                 (4.90)
                                  dt
                                 disq
                              Ls      = −Ls ω(t)isd + vq − vsq .                (4.91)
                                  dt

  Equations (4.87)–(4.91) constitute a dq-frame model for the circuit of
  Figure 4.14.

  EXAMPLE 4.9                dq-Frame Model of a Second-Order Three-Phase
  System
  Assume that the dynamics of a balanced three-phase system are described by
  the following space-phasor equation:

                                        d2 − →  →
                                             y =−
                                                u.                              (4.92)
                                        dt 2
        dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                  109

       →
       y = ydq ejε(t) and −
   Let −                  →
                          u = udq ejε(t) . Thus, we obtain
                                        #          $
                  d 2 ydq          dydq
                          + j   2ω       +  jξ − ω 2
                                                       ydq = udq ,            (4.93)
                   dt 2             dt

   where

                                      dε
                                         = ω(t),                              (4.94)
                                      dt
                                     dω
                                        = ξ(t).                               (4.95)
                                     dt

   Decomposing (4.93) into real and imaginary parts, we obtain

                        d 2 yd      dyq
                            2
                               − 2ω     − ω2 yd − ξyq = ud ,                  (4.96)
                         dt          dt
                        d 2 yq      dyd
                               + 2ω     + ξyd − ω2 yq = uq .                  (4.97)
                         dt 2        dt

   Equations (4.94)–(4.97) represent the dynamics of the system of (4.92) in dq-
   frame. Based on (4.94)–(4.97), ε(t) and ω(t) are two new state variables, and
   ξ(t) is a new control variable. Note that although the original three-phase system
   is linear, its description in the dq-frame becomes nonlinear if the frequency, ω,
   is not constant.

4.6.4.2 Derivation of dq-Frame Model from abc-Frame Equations As explained
in Section 4.3, the model of an asymmetrical system cannot be expressed in the space-
phasor form. Rather, an asymmetrical system is usually modeled in either the αβ-frame
or the dq-frame. If the equations of the physical system are provided in abc-frame,
they can be expressed in αβ-frame using the approach presented in Example 4.7 or
Example 4.10. Then, to develop the dq-frame model, the α- and β-axis variables
can be eliminated from the αβ-frame model using (4.70). If the derivative of the dq-
frame angle ε appears in the equations, it is replaced by ω = dε/dt. Thus, the new
state equation dε/dt = ω is introduced to the system equations. The next example
illustrates these steps.

   EXAMPLE 4.10          dq-Frame Model of Permanent-Magnet Synchronous
   Machine
   Based on the model of a conventional salient-pole synchronous machine (SM)
   [53], equations of a permanent-magnet synchronous machine (PMSM) can be
   derived by introducing the following changes to those of the SM: (i) the stator
   ﬂux equations are preserved, but the equations describing the damper windings
   ﬂuxes are eliminated, (ii) the damper winding currents are replaced by zero,
110      SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


   and (iii) the ﬁeld current is replaced by a constant parameter corresponding to
   the permanent magnet ﬂux. This procedure yields6
                                          ⎡                   ⎤
                       ⎡        ⎤     ⎤
                                      ⎡         λm cos θr
                           λa      ia
                                          ⎢       #         $ ⎥
                       ⎢λ ⎥      ⎢ ⎥ ⎢ λ cos θr − 2π          ⎥
                       ⎣ b ⎦ = L ⎣ ib ⎦ + ⎢ m     #
                                                          3 ⎥,
                                                            $⎦
                                                                                 (4.98)
                                          ⎣
                        λc         ic       λm cos θr − 4π3


   where λabc , iabc , and θr are the stator ﬂux, the stator current, and the ro-
   tor angle, respectively. λm represents the maximum ﬂux generated by the
   rotor magnet, linked by a stator winding. L, the inductance matrix, is
   deﬁned as


      L=
       ⎡                              0        1              #          $      ⎤
              a cos 2θr + b    a cos 2 θr − π3 − 2b a cos 2 θr − 2π   3    − 2b
       ⎢          0       1           #         $                               ⎥
      2⎢
       ⎢ a cos 2 θr − π3 − 2b a cos 2 θr − 2π                            b      ⎥
                                                                                ⎥,
       ⎢                                     3    + b     a  cos 2θ r −  2      ⎥
      3⎣         #         $                                  #          $      ⎦
                             b                  b
         a cos 2 θr − 3 − 2
                        2π
                                   a cos 2θr − 2      a cos 2 θr − 3 + b
                                                                      4π


                                                                                 (4.99)

   where a = (Ld − Lq )/2 and b = (Ld + Lq )/2. In turn, Ld and Lq are two
   constant inductance parameters that depend on the machine construction and
   geometry. Equations (4.98) and (4.99) indicate that each stator winding exhibits
   a variable self-inductance in addition to variable mutual inductances with the
   two other stator windings. The stator ﬂux and terminal voltage are, in turn,
   related by the following state-space equations:
                 ⎡   ⎤ ⎡            ⎤⎡ ⎤ ⎡         ⎤ ⎡ ⎤
                  λa      −Rs 0   0    ia      vsa      vn
              d ⎢ ⎥ ⎢               ⎥⎢i ⎥ ⎢v ⎥ ⎢v ⎥
                 ⎣ b⎦ = ⎣
                  λ        0 −R s 0 ⎦ ⎣ b ⎦ + ⎣ sb ⎦ − ⎣ n ⎦ ,                  (4.100)
              dt
                  λc       0  0 −Rs    ic      vsc      vn

   where Rs is the stator winding resistance and Vn is the voltage of the
   stator neutral point. Equations (4.98)–(4.100) describe the PMSM in the
   abc-frame. The model approximately represents a PMSM with interior
   (buried) magnets where the magnets are mounted inside a steel rotor core
   [54]. We express these equations ﬁrst in αβ-frame and then in a selected
   dq-frame.


6 Equations of a simpliﬁed, nonsalient-rotor PMSM are derived in Section A.5.
       dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                                 111

     αβ-frame representation

     To transform (4.98) to the αβ-frame, each abc-frame vector is expressed in
  the αβ-frame based on (4.47). Thus,
                                                               ⎡                    ⎤
                                                                     λm cos θr
                          %        &           %         &             #          $
                              λα                    iα         ⎢               2π ⎥
                                                               ⎢                    ⎥
                     CT                = LCT                 + ⎢ λm cos θr − 3 ⎥ .          (4.101)
                              λβ                    iβ         ⎣       #          $ ⎦
                                                                 λm cos θr − 4π 3


  Premultiplying both sides of (4.101) by (2/3)C and using the identity (4.53) at
  the left-hand side of the resultant, we deduce
                                                                   ⎡            ⎤
                                                                  λm cos θr
                 %        &                %        &               #          $⎥
                     λα           2            iα         2 ⎢
                                                            ⎢ λm cos θr − 2π    ⎥
                              =     CLCT                 + C⎢
                                                                               $⎥
                                                                             3    .         (4.102)
                     λβ           3            iβ         3 ⎣       #           ⎦
                                                              λm cos θr − 3 4π



  Substituting for C and L in (4.102), respectively from (4.45) and (4.99), we
  deduce
          ⎡#         $             #      $          #        $                  ⎤
% &           Ld −Lq                 L +L              Ld −Lq                      % &
 λα                    cos 2θr + d 2 q                          sin 2θr             iα
          ⎢      2
                   #         $                #          $
                                                           2
                                                                     #           ⎥
                                                                                $⎦
      = ⎣            L   −L                     L   −L                  L   +L
 λβ                    d   q
                               sin 2θr      −     d    q
                                                           cos 2θr +      d   q     iβ
                              2                                        2                2
             %        &
            λm cos θr
          +             .                                                                   (4.103)
            λm sin θr

  Following a similar procedure, the αβ-frame representation of (4.100) is
  deduced as
                     % & %               &% & %         &
                   d λα         −Rs 0       iα      vsα
                           =                    +         .        (4.104)
                  dt λβ          0 −Rs      iβ      vsβ

  It should be noted that (4.100) represents a symmetrical system. Therefore,
  (4.104) could also be directly derived by inspection of the abc-frame equation
  of only one phase, as explained in Section 4.5.5.

     dq-frame representation

     Equation (4.103) in the αβ-frame model of the PMSM includes θr as a
  variable. Therefore, the analysis and control design based on the αβ-frame
  representation is not a straightforward task. However, transformation of the
112          SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


     equations to dq-frame renders them time invariant and more suitable for analysis
     and control design if the dq-frame is synchronized to the rotor angle θr . This
     corresponds to ε = θr in (4.70) and (4.71). Thus,
                                   %            &                  %        &
                                       fα (t)             −1
                                                                     fd (t)
                                                    =R         [θr ]          ,       (4.105)
                                       fβ (t)                        fq (t)


     where
                                                      %                     &
                                       −1
                                                          cos θr − sin θr
                                   R        [θr ] =                               .   (4.106)
                                                          sin θr cos θr


     Therefore, (4.103) can be rewritten as
         %        &
    −1
             λd
R
           λq
          ⎡#               $         #      $          #        $                ⎤
                  Ld −Lq               L +L              Ld −Lq                         % &
                         cos 2θr + d 2 q                          sin 2θr                id
      ⎢              2
                      #        $                #         $
                                                            2
                                                                       #        $⎥   −1
     =⎣                 Ld −Lq                    Ld −Lq                  Ld +Lq ⎦ R
                                 sin 2θr      −             cos 2θr +                    iq
                           2                         2                       2
             %       &
           λm cos θr
         +             .                                                              (4.107)
           λm sin θr


     Premultiplying both sides of (4.107) by R, we deduce
%        &
    λd
    λq
             ⎡#             $         #      $          #        $                 ⎤
                   Ld −Lq               L +L              Ld −Lq                         % &
                          cos 2θr + d 2 q                          sin 2θr                id
       ⎢              2
                       #        $                #         $
                                                             2
                                                                        #        $ ⎥  −1
    = R⎣                 Ld −Lq                    Ld −Lq                  Ld +Lq ⎦ R
                                  sin 2θr      −             cos 2θr +                    iq
                            2                         2                       2
              %       &
            λm cos θr
         +R             ,                                                             (4.108)
            λm sin θr


     where
                                                    %                     &
                                                          cos θr sin θr
                                     R[θr ] =                                 .       (4.109)
                                                        − sin θr cos θr
    dq-FRAME REPRESENTATION AND CONTROL OF THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS                                                                 113

Equation (4.108) can be further simpliﬁed to
                                     %        &        %          &%        &    %   &
                                         λd                Ld 0        id         λm
                                                  =                             +      .                                 (4.110)
                                         λq                0 Lq        iq          0

Similarly (4.104) can be rewritten as
                           %        &            %          &      % &       %     &
         d             −1
                                λd                    −Rs 0      −1
                                                                     id    −1
                                                                                vsd
                   R                      =                    R        +R            ,                                  (4.111)
         dt                     λq                     0 −Rs         iq         vsq

which can be rearranged as
         %         &         % & %        &     % &       %     &
 −1 d
              λd         dR−1 λd   −Rs 0         i
                                              −1 d     −1
                                                            vsd
R                      +         =          R       +R           . (4.112)
    dt        λq          dt  λq    0 −Rs        iq         vsq

Premultiplying both sides of (4.112) by R and rearranging the resultant, we
deduce
   % &               % &        %          &    % & %        &
 d λd          dR−1 λd            −Rs 0       −1 d
                                                  i      vsd
         = −R              +R                R        +
 dt λq           dt    λq          0 −Rs          iq     vsq
                              % &       %
                                            −Rs 0
                                                     &      % & %         &
                 dR−1      dθr    λd                     −1 d
                                                             i        vsd
         =− R                         +R               R         +         .
                  dθr       dt    λq          0 −Rs          iq       vsq

                                                                                                                         (4.113)

Substituting for R−1 and R in (4.113), one concludes
              %        &        %                 &%         &    %                  &%        &       %         &
         d        λd                  0 ωr              λd         −Rs 0                  id               vsd
                            =                                    +                                 +                 ,
         dt       λq                 −ωr 0              λq          0 −Rs                 iq               vsq

                                                                                                                         (4.114)

where

                                                           dθr
                                                               = ωr .                                                    (4.115)
                                                           dt

   To derive an expression for the machine torque, the principle of power bal-
ance can be used. Based on (4.83), the power delivered to the machine stator is
expressed in dq-frame as
                                     % &T %      &
                                   3 id      vsd
                            Pe =                   .                   (4.116)
                                   2 iq      Vsq
114    SPACE PHASORS AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL FRAMES


  Substituting for [vsd vsq ]T from (4.114) in (4.116), we have
                          %        &T %           &          %        &       %            &
                    3         id           Rs id         d        λd               −ωr λq
               Pe =                                    +                   +                    ,   (4.117)
                    2         iq           Rs iq         dt       λq               ωr λd

  which can be simpliﬁed as
          3 #2        $ 3  dλ         dλq
                                           
                                                 30            1
                                d
      Pe = Rs id + iq +
                    2
                           id     + iq       + ωr λd iq − λq id .
          2          2     dt        dt       2           
                                         
                  Ploss                        Pstored                                Pgap

                                                                                                    (4.118)

  On the right-hand side of (4.118), the ﬁrst term represents the ohmic power
  loss of the stator windings, whereas the second term corresponds to the power
  stored/released by the magnetic ﬁeld. The third term, however, represents the
  power delivered to the machine air gap, Pgap , which is responsible for the
  machine torque. Thus,

                                     Pgap   30                 1
                              Te =        =    λd i q − λ q i d .                                   (4.119)
                                      ωr    2

  It is common to express the torque expression (4.119) in terms of space phasors
  as
                                            3 − →−→ 
                                     Te =     Im i λ ∗ .                                            (4.120)
                                            2
  Substituting for λd and λq from (4.110) in (4.119), we deduce

                                     30        1       3
                          Te =          Ld − Lq id iq + λm iq .                                     (4.121)
                                     2                 2
     Equations (4.110), (4.114), (4.115), and (4.121) constitute a dq-frame model
  for the PMSM. Since the dq-frame is synchronized to θr , the model is also
  known as the model in rotor-ﬁeld coordinates. As (4.110), (4.114), (4.115), and
  (4.121) indicate, the dq-frame model of the PMSM is time invariant since the
  parameters are constants, but it is nonlinear as the products of the state variables
  are present in the equations.
5 Two-Level, Three-Phase
          Voltage-Sourced Converter


5.1     INTRODUCTION

Chapter 2 introduced the principles of operation of the DC/AC half-bridge converter
and based on the method of averaging presented an equivalent circuit and a dynamic
model for the converter. In Chapter 3, the control of the half-bridge converter was
studied. Chapter 4 introduced the abc- to αβ-frame transformation to reduce the
complexity of the control problem for a three-phase converter system. Chapter 4
further presented the abc- to dq-frame transformation to enable the control scheme
of a three-phase converter system to process DC rather than sinusoidal signals and
thus to provide a simpler structure.
   This chapter employs the half-bridge converter as the building block for the
three-phase voltage-sourced converter (VSC). A three-phase VSC can be realized
based on a variety of conﬁgurations. However, in this book we consider two main
conﬁgurations: the two-level VSC and the three-level neutral-point clamped (NPC)
VSC. This chapter introduces the two-level three-phase VSC as the composition
of three identical half-bridge converters. In Chapter 6, we will introduce the three-
level NPC three-phase VSC as the composition of six identical half-bridge con-
verters. Hereinafter, throughout this book we refer to the two-level three-phase
VSC as two-level VSC and to the three-level NPC three-phase VSC as three-level
NPC.1



5.2     TWO-LEVEL VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER

5.2.1    Circuit Structure
Figure 5.1 shows a schematic diagram of the two-level VSC [55]. The two-level VSC
is composed of three identical half-bridge converters of Figure 2.13. The converter


1 We shall use the generic term VSC for both the two-level VSC and the three-level NPC, in the context of

system studies where the converter conﬁguration is not the main focus.

Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,     by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                    115
116          TWO-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER


          Vp= VDC /2       Half-bridge converter— Half-bridge converter— Half-bridge converter—
                 p                 phase a                phase b                phase c

                      ′
                     iDC
                                iQ1      D1             iQ1      D1            iQ1      D1
                               Q1      –               Q1      –              Q1      –
                                       + Vd                    + Vd                   + Vd
                               Vd +
                                  –      ron           Vd +
                                                          –     ron           Vd +
                                                                                 –      ron
                                ron      iD1           ron      iD1           ron      iD1
 VDC /2
          +                       ′
                                i pa                                                              Vta′
          –                                                                                              ia
                                ′
                               ina
                                                         ′
                                                       i pb                                       Vtb′ i
                                                                                                         b
         0
                                                        ′
                                                       inb
                                                                                ′
                                                                              i pc                Vtc′ i
                                                                                                           c
 VDC /2
          +                                                                   i′nc
          –
                                iQ4      D4             iQ4      D4            iQ4      D4
                               Q4      –              Q4       –              Q4      –
                                       + Vd                    + Vd                   + Vd
                               Vd +
                                  –      ron           Vd +
                                                          –     ron           Vd +      ron
                                ron      iD4           ron      iD4           ron      iD4


                 n
        Vn= –VDC /2

                 FIGURE 5.1 Schematic diagram of a nonideal two-level VSC.




of Figure 5.1 is called the two-level VSC since each of its AC-side terminals can
assume either of the voltage levels −VDC and VDC . The DC sides of the half-bridge
converters are connected in parallel with a common DC-side voltage source. The
AC-side terminal of each half-bridge converter is interfaced with one phase of a
three-phase AC system (not shown in Fig. 5.1). The two-level VSC can provide a
bidirectional power-ﬂow path between the DC-side voltage source and the three-
phase AC system. The AC system can be passive, for example, an RLC load, or
active, for example, a synchronous machine. In the two-level VSC of Figure 5.1,
we index the half-bridge converters by letters a, b, and c, to associate each with the
corresponding phase of the AC system.


5.2.2     Principles of Operation
Chapter 2 introduced the pulse-width modulation (PWM) switching strategy and
deduced that the AC-side terminal voltage of the nonideal half-bridge converter of
                                            TWO-LEVEL VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER                         117

Figure 2.13 is given by (2.56), as2


                                              VDC    i(t)
                             Vt (t) = m(t)       −        Ve − re i(t),                              (5.1)
                                               2    |i(t)|


where Ve and re are deﬁned by (2.37) and (2.38), as


                                                             
                                      Qrr + Qtc                trr
                         Ve = V d −                 ron + VDC      ,                                  (5.2)
                                           Ts                  Ts
                                       
                                    trr
                         re = 1 −         ron ≈ ron ,                                                 (5.3)
                                    Ts


and Ts is the converter switching period.
    The converter AC-side terminal voltage Vt (t) is controlled based on (5.1). The term
m(t)(VDC /2) in (5.1) represents a dependent voltage source that can be controlled by
the modulating signal, m(t). The term re i(t) in (5.1) can be regarded as an ohmic
voltage drop. However, (i(t)/|i(t)|)Ve represents a voltage offset whose polarity is
dependent on the polarity of the AC-side current. If the current is negative, the offset
is added to the terminal voltage, whereas it will be subtracted from the terminal voltage
if the current is positive.
    The applications studied in this book invariably concern sinusoidal waveforms. The
(average of the) converter AC-side terminal voltage assumes a sinusoidal waveform
if m(t) is a sinusoidal function with the required amplitude and frequency. However,
as (5.1) suggests, the offset term, that is, (i(t)/|i(t)|)Ve , introduces a dead zone in the
control characteristic function from m(t) to Vt (t), associated with the current zero
crossing [16]. Consequently, Vt (t) is slightly distorted compared to a pure sinusoidal
waveform. The distortion is negligible since Ve is typically only a few volts. This value
is signiﬁcantly smaller than the typical voltage levels for VSC systems. The impact
of the distortion is further mitigated since m(t) is often controlled by a closed-loop
scheme that attempts to force the AC-side current to track a distortion-free sinusoidal
command. For these reasons, we no longer tackle the voltage distortion issue in our
subsequent formulations and approximate (5.1) by


                                                    VDC
                                   Vt (t) = m(t)       − ron i(t).                                   (5.4)
                                                     2

2 Hereinafter, for the sake of compactness of notations, we drop the overbar signifying an averaged variable.

However, it will be remembered that the variables are averaged over one switching cycle, unless otherwise
noted.
118     TWO-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER


In the two-level VSC of Figure 5.1, there are three identical half-bridge converters,
one for each AC-side phase. Thus, the three AC-side terminal voltages are

                                              VDC
                            Vta (t) = ma (t)     − ron ia (t),                     (5.5)
                                               2
                                              VDC
                            Vtb (t) = mb (t)     − ron ib (t),                     (5.6)
                                               2
                                              VDC
                            Vtc (t) = mc (t)     − ron ic (t).                     (5.7)
                                               2

Equations (5.5) – (5.7) indicate that, to obtain a balanced three-phase AC-side voltage
and a balanced three-phase line current, ma (t), mb (t), and mc (t) must constitute a
balanced three-phase signal; these are usually delivered by a closed-loop control
scheme.


5.2.3   Power Loss of Nonideal Two-Level VSC
Based on (2.59), the power loss of the half-bridge DC/AC converter is given by

                                                   
                                        Qrr + Qtc
                     Ploss = VDC                        + Ve |i| + re i2 .
                                            Ts

Thus, the power loss of the two-level VSC of Figure 5.1 is the summation of those of
the three phases as

                                                                  
                                                        Qrr + Qtc
                 Ploss =       Ploss(abc) = 3VDC
                                                            Ts
                                                           #               $
                           +Ve (|ia | + |ib | + |ic |) + re i2a + i2b + i2c .       (5.8)


If ia , ib , and ic constitute a balanced three-phase sinusoidal waveform with a frequency
of ω, due to the presence of the absolute value and square functions in (5.8), Ploss
includes pulsating terms with the frequency 2ω. However, the average of (5.8) over
one period of the sinusoid is

                                                     
                                       3 (Qrr + Qtc )    6      3
                 Ploss 0 = VDC                        + Vei + rei2 ,            (5.9)
                                             Ts          π      2
                                                    
                                            iloss


where the notation  0 signiﬁes the averaging operator over T = 2π/ω, and i is the
amplitude of the three-phase current.
                                           MODELS AND CONTROL OF TWO-LEVEL VSC                              119

                               Averaged nonideal three-phase voltage-sourced converter
                                   Averaged ideal three-phase voltage-sourced converter


             Vp              i′DC iDC         ipa Half-bridge converter—phase a
                                                       1+ma
                                                            ia
  VDC /2                                                 2
        +
         –                                                                  VDC
                                                                 Vta = ma              Vta ron V′ta i
                                                                             2
                  iloss =
                                                                                                        a
        0                                                    0         +




                                                                     –
  VDC /2          3)Qrr + Qtc )                                                        Vtb ron V′tb i
        +                                                                                            b
        –               Ts                             1–ma
                                              ina           ia                         Vtc ron V′tc i
                                                         2                                           c
             Vn
                                                    Half-bridge converter—phase b
                                               ipb

                                                       1+mb
                                                            ib
                                                         2
                                                                            VDC
                                                                 Vtb = mb
                                                                             2
                                                             0         +
                                                                     –




                                                       1–mb
                                                            ib
                                               inb       2

                                                    Half-bridge converter—phase c
                                               ipc
                                                       1+mc
                                                            ic
                                                         2
                                                                            VDC
                                                                 Vtc = mc
                                                                             2
                                                             0         +
                                                                     –




                        PDC – Pt                                                  Pt
                                                       1–mc
                                                            ic
                                               inc       2




  FIGURE 5.2 Averaged equivalent circuit of the nonideal two-level VSC of Figure 5.1.


5.3     MODELS AND CONTROL OF TWO-LEVEL VSC

5.3.1    Averaged Model of Two-Level VSC
Figure 5.2 illustrates the averaged equivalent circuit of the two-level VSC of Figure
5.1, as an extension of the averaged equivalent circuit of the half-bridge converter,
that is, Figure 2.17. As discussed in Chapter 2, the averaged model of a nonideal
half-bridge converter can be constructed by augmenting the averaged model of an ideal
120     TWO-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER


counterpart with two parasitic components; these are (i) the on-state resistance of one
switch cell, connected in series with each AC-side terminal, and (ii) a current source
connected in parallel with the converter DC side. While the former predominantly
represents the converter conduction loss, the latter mainly represents the converter
switching loss. Similarly, the averaged model for the two-level VSC of Figure 5.1
can also be regarded as the averaged model of an ideal two-level VSC (identiﬁed
by dashed lines in Figure 5.2) supplemented by one on-state switch resistance in
each phase, denoted by ron , and an equivalent current source at the DC side, iloss =
3(Qrr + Qtc )/Ts . Since ron and iloss are approximately constant and independent of
VSC voltages and currents, they can be lumped with AC and DC systems, respectively,
interfaced with nonideal VSC. For example, in a drive system, ron can be added to
the motor stator resistance. Thus, we leave ron and iloss out from our subsequent
developments and focus on the ideal two-level VSC.
   Figure 5.3 illustrates the averaged equivalent circuit of an ideal two-level VSC,
and the AC-side terminal voltages are

                                            VDC
                                  Vta (t) =     ma (t),                          (5.10)
                                             2
                                            VDC
                                  Vtb (t) =     mb (t),                          (5.11)
                                             2
                                            VDC
                                  Vtc (t) =     mc (t),                          (5.12)
                                             2

where mabc (t) constitute a balanced three-phase signal, expressed as

                                      cos [ε(t)] ,
                            ma (t) = m(t)                                        (5.13)
                                                      
                                                    2π
                                      cos ε(t) −
                            mb (t) = m(t)                ,                       (5.14)
                                                     3
                                                      
                                                    4π
                                      cos ε(t) −
                            mc (t) = m(t)                ,                       (5.15)
                                                     3

where ε(t) embeds the frequency and phase-angle information. The DC-side and AC-
side terminal quantities of the two-level VSC are related based on the power balance
principle, that is, PDC (t) = Pt (t). Therefore,

               VDC (t)iDC (t) = Vta (t)ia (t) + Vtb (t)ib (t) + Vtc (t)ic (t).   (5.16)

For the reasons outlined in Chapter 4, a VSC system is usually controlled in αβ-
frame or dq-frame. In these reference frames, the control is reduced to the control of
two subsystems and, further, rapid control of the amplitude and/or frequency of the
VSC AC-side voltage is straightforward. The following sections present the αβ- and
dq-frame representations of the two-level VSC.
                                              MODELS AND CONTROL OF TWO-LEVEL VSC                       121

                                   Averaged ideal three-phase voltage-sourced converter

                        Vp                             Half-bridge converter—phase a
                                     iDC         ipa
                               +
                                                          1+ma
 VDC /2                                                        ia
                                                            2
            +
            –                                                                   VDC
                                                                    Vta = ma
                                                                                 2         Vta   ia
        0                     VDC                               0           +




                                                                        –
 VDC /2                                                                                    Vtb   ib
            +
            –                                             1–ma
                                                               ia
                               –                ina         2                              Vtc   ic
                        Vn
                                                 ipb Half-bridge converter—phase b

                                                          1+mb
                                                               ib
                                                            2
                                                                                VDC
                                                                    Vtb = mb
                                                                                 2
                                                                0           +
                                                                        –




                                                          1–mb
                                                               ib
                                                inb         2


                                                       Half-bridge converter—phase c
                                                 ipc
                                                          1+mc
                                                               ic
                                                            2
                                                                                VDC
                                                                    Vtc = mc
                                                                                 2
                                                                0           +
                                                                        –




                             PDC = Pt                                                 Pt
                                                          1–mc
                                                               ic
                                                 inc        2



                  FIGURE 5.3 Averaged equivalent circuit of the ideal two-level VSC.



5.3.2           Model of Two-Level VSC in αβ-Frame
Equations (5.10)–(5.12) describe the relationships between a modulating signal and
the corresponding AC-side terminal voltage of the two-level VSC. Equations (5.10)–
(5.12) correspond to the space-phasor equation

                                           →
                                           −         VDC −
                                                         →
                                           V t (t) =     m (t),                                       (5.17)
                                                      2
122        TWO-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER


which can be decomposed into real and imaginary parts, as

                                                VDC
                                      Vtα (t) =     mα (t),                           (5.18)
                                                 2
                                                VDC
                                      Vtβ (t) =     mβ (t).                           (5.19)
                                                 2
Equations (5.18) and (5.19) suggest that the α- and β-axis components of the converter
AC-side terminal voltage are linearly proportional to the corresponding components of
the modulating signal, while the proportionality constant is VDC /2. Equations (5.18)
and (5.19) also imply that the two-level VSC can be described by two subsystems in
αβ-frame. The transfer function of each subsystem is the (time-varying) gain VDC /2.
   Based on (4.56), the AC-side terminal real power of the two-level VSC can be
expressed in terms of the αβ-frame quantities as

                                      3-                             .
                           Pt (t) =     Vtα (t)iα (t) + Vtβ (t)iβ (t) .               (5.20)
                                      2
It then follows from the power balance principle that

                                           3-                             .
                       VDC (t)iDC (t) =      Vtα (t)iα (t) + Vtβ (t)iβ (t) .          (5.21)
                                           2
Equations (5.18), (5.19), and (5.21) constitute an αβ-frame model of the two-level
VSC, as illustrated in Figure 5.4. In subsequent chapters, this model will be used for
the analysis and control design.
   Equations (5.18) and (5.19) correspond to two subsystems, the α- and β-axis
subsystems, as illustrated in Figure 5.4(a). The two subsystems receive mα (t) and
mβ (t) as the corresponding inputs and provide Vtα (t) and Vtβ (t) as the respective
outputs. The two subsystems are decoupled and linear with a time-varying gain of


                                                        iα
      mα          X          Vtα
                                           Vtα          X

 VDC /2                                                                   1.5         iDC
                                           Vtβ          X
      mβ          X          Vtβ                                                VDC
                                                        iβ
                 (a)                                             (b)
           FIGURE 5.4 Control model of the ideal two-level VSC in the αβ-frame.
                                     MODELS AND CONTROL OF TWO-LEVEL VSC                 123



                Controller                VSC         Plant
            α-axis compensator
            –
 iαref           kα (s)                    X                                             P
                          uα       mα           Vtα                   iα


                                                          Transfer          Transfer
                                                        function of        function of
                 VDC /2          VDC /2                the terminal        the rest of
                                                         voltage to         the plant
                                                          current

          β-axis compensator
                          uβ       mβ           Vtβ                   iβ
 iβref           kβ (s)                    X                                             Q
            –




FIGURE 5.5 Generic control block diagram of a VSC system based on the αβ-frame control.



VDC (t)/2. The DC-side current of the two-level VSC is determined according to
(5.21), as shown in Figure 5.4(b). As discussed in Chapter 4, the α- and β-frame
components of a three-phase signal embed the amplitude and frequency informa-
tion. Thus, the amplitude and frequency of converter AC-side terminal voltage can
be controlled by mα and mβ . Therefore, the two-level VSC can be employed in ap-
plications where rapid and ﬂexible control of amplitude and/or frequency (phase) is
required.
   Figure 5.5 illustrates a control block diagram of a generic current-controlled VSC
system in αβ-frame. Figure 5.5 illustrates that a closed-loop scheme regulates iα and
iβ at their corresponding reference commands. This is achieved by controlling Vtα
and Vtβ that, in turn, are controlled by mα (t) and mβ (t), respectively. Figure 5.5 also
shows that the outputs of the compensators are scaled down by a factor of VDC /2, to
compensate for the gains of the α- and β-axis subsystems and, therefore, to make the
loop gain independent of the DC-side voltage level.
   In most applications, the current control strategy is an intermediate step toward the
control of other variables. For example, in a grid-connected VSC system the objective
is often to control the real and reactive power that the VSC system exchanges with
the grid. This is fulﬁlled by controlling the α- and β-axis components of the VSC
AC-side current. Hence, the overall control plant in the system of Figure 5.5 can be
considered as the combination of two cascaded, two-input/two-output subplants. The
ﬁrst subplant has inputs Vtα and Vtβ , while it provides outputs iα and iβ ; the second
subplant receives iα and iβ as its inputs and provides P and Q as ﬁnal outputs. In
case faster responses and/or superior disturbance rejection are required, P and Q
themselves can be fed back and regulated by an outer control layer (not shown in Fig.
5.5) that issues the reference commands iαref and iβref .
124     TWO-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER


5.3.3   Model and Control of Two-Level VSC in dq-Frame
In a current-controlled VSC system, optimization of the compensators is difﬁcult
since the variables are sinusoidal functions of time. Thus, the closed-loop control
system must have an adequately large bandwidth to ensure command following with
small steady-state errors, in addition to satisfactory disturbance rejection. Hence, the
control design task is not straightforward, especially in variable-frequency applica-
tions. By contrast, in dq-frame the signals and variables are transformed to equivalent
DC quantities. Hence, irrespective of the operating frequency, conventional PI com-
pensators can be utilized for the control. Moreover, the αβ-frame representation of
some asymmetrical three-phase systems includes time-varying parameters, for exam-
ple, time-varying inductances in the αβ-frame model of a salient-pole synchronous
machine, which make the control design task more involved. However, an appropriate
dq-frame representation of such systems results in models with constant parameters.
Therefore, a VSC system is preferably modeled and controlled in dq-frame.
    A dq-frame representation of the two-level VSC can be developed following the
procedures presented in Section 4.6.4. Substituting for m(t) = (md + jmq )ejε(t) and
Vt (t) = (Vtd + jVtq )ejε(t) in (5.17), one deduces

                                              VDC
                     (Vtd + jVtq )ejε(t) =        (md + jmq )ejε(t) ,            (5.22)
                                               2

and concludes

                                            VDC
                                  Vtd (t) =     md (t),                          (5.23)
                                             2
                                            VDC
                                  Vtq (t) =     mq (t).                          (5.24)
                                              2

Equations (5.22) and (5.23) suggest that the d- and q-axis components of the VSC AC-
side terminal voltage are linearly proportional to the corresponding components of the
modulating signal, and the proportionality constant is VDC /2. Equations (5.22) and
(5.23) also imply that the two-level VSC can be described by two linear, time-varying
subsystems in dq-frame. The transfer function of each subsystem is a time-varying
gain, VDC /2.
   The AC-side terminal real power of the two-level VSC is formulated based on
(4.83) as

                                  3-                             .
                       Pt (t) =     Vtd (t)id (t) + Vtq (t)iq (t) .              (5.25)
                                  2

Then, the principle of power balance requires that

                                       3-                             .
                   VDC (t)iDC (t) =      Vtd (t)id (t) + Vtq (t)iq (t) .         (5.26)
                                       2
                                               CLASSIFICATION OF VSC SYSTEMS           125
                                                   id
        md          X       Vtd
                                        Vtd        X

   VDC /2                                                          1.5              iDC
                                        Vtq        X
        mq          X       Vtq
                                                                           VDC
                                                   iq
                   (a)                                      (b)
             FIGURE 5.6 Control model of the ideal two-level VSC in dq-frame.



Equations (5.22), (5.23), and (5.26) constitute a model for the two-level VSC, ex-
pressed in dq-frame (Fig. 5.6). Comparing the block diagram of Figure 5.6 with that
of Figure 5.4, one concludes that the models of the two-level VSC in dq-frame and
αβ-frame are conceptually the same. Hence, the control block diagram of a current-
controlled VSC system in dq-frame, illustrated in Figure 5.7, is similar to its αβ-frame
counterpart, that is, Figure 5.5.
   Figure 5.7 illustrates that a closed-loop scheme regulates id and iq at their corre-
sponding reference commands, by controlling Vtd and Vtq that, in turn, are controlled
by md (t) and mq (t), respectively. Similar to the case of the αβ-frame control, the out-
puts of the compensators are multiplied by 2/VDC to make the loop gain independent
of the DC-side voltage level. If, for example, the current control is adopted as an
intermediate step for the control of the real and reactive power exchanged between
the VSC and an AC system, the commands idref and iqref can be obtained from an
outer layer of control (not shown in Figure 5.7). Another example of a nested control
scheme is the one used to control the ﬂux and torque of an asynchronous machine. In
this case, id and iq control the machine ﬂux and torque, respectively. The composite
control plant therefore consists of a subsystem that describes the dynamics of id and
iq as functions of Vtd and Vtq , and a second subsystem that expresses the machine
ﬂux and torque in terms of id and iq .


5.4     CLASSIFICATION OF VSC SYSTEMS

In this book, the generic VSC systems of Figures 5.5 and 5.7 are frequently encoun-
tered. Although the details are highly application speciﬁc, three main groups of VSC
systems can be identiﬁed as follows:

      r Grid-Imposed Frequency VSC System: In this group the VSC system is interfaced
       with a relatively large AC system, for example, a stiff utility grid. Therefore, the
       operating frequency is dictated by the AC system and is fairly constant. The
       grid-imposed frequency VSC systems are the subject of Chapters 7 and 8.
126      TWO-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE VOLTAGE-SOURCED CONVERTER



                Controller                VSC           Plant
            d-axis compensator
            –
 idref          kd (s)                     X                                                 P (φ)
                       ud         md            Vtd                      id

                                                           Transfer             Transfer
                                                          function of
               VDC /2            VDC /2         ε (t)      terminal     ε(t)   function of
                                                                               the rest of
                                                          voltage to            the plant
                                                            current

           q-axis compensator                                            iq
                       u          mq            Vtq
 iqref           kq(s) q                   X                                                 Q (T )
             –




FIGURE 5.7 Generic control block diagram of a VSC system based on the dq-frame control.

    r Controlled-Frequency VSC System: In this group, the AC system frequency is
      regulated by the control scheme of the VSC system, where the reference for the
      frequency may be obtained from a supervisory control system. The controlled-
      frequency VSC systems are treated in Chapter 9.
    r Variable-Frequency VSC System: In a variable-frequency VSC system, the VSC
      is interfaced with an electric machine, and the operating frequency is a state
      variable of the overall VSC system, depends on the system operating point, and
      is not directly regulated. The variable-frequency VSC systems are studied in
      Chapter 10.

   It should be noted that based on the foregoing classiﬁcation, a VSC system can also
be a composite system, that is, it includes a combination of the above-mentioned three
classes. For example, a variable-speed wind-power unit employs a variable-frequency
VSC system in conjunction with a grid-imposed frequency VSC system. The former
VSC system controls a generator driven by a wind turbine, whereas the latter VSC
system transfers the power to a (constant-frequency) utility grid. Another example
of a composite VSC system is a back-to-back HVDC converter system that transfers
energy from a utility grid to an off-grid island. Such an HVDC converter system is
composed of a grid-imposed frequency VSC system and a controlled-frequency VSC
system.
6 Three-Level, Three-Phase,
          Neutral-Point Clamped,
          Voltage-Sourced Converter


6.1   INTRODUCTION

Chapter 5 introduced the two-level, three-phase voltage-sourced converter (VSC)
(Fig. 5.1) as the composition of three half-bridge converters. The two-level VSC is
the dominant building block for a wide range of apparatus in medium/high-power
applications. Figure 5.1 (and Fig. 2.13 for the half-bridge converter) illustrates that
each switch cell in the two-level VSC must withstand the whole DC-side voltage in
off state. Therefore, if the two-level VSC is employed for a high-power/high-voltage
application, the switch cells must be rated for a high DC voltage level. If we consider
a high voltage level for a speciﬁc application, then to implement the two-level VSC,
probably the highest voltage switches that fulﬁll the voltage rating requirement are
selected. Such switches are often the state of the art and typically expensive. Other
than the cost and availability issues, beyond a voltage rating, even the highest voltage
available switches may not fulﬁll the voltage requirements. The voltage ratings of the
state-of-the-art switches, currently and most probably in the future, would not meet
the voltage requirements of most utility applications.
    One approach to achieving high-voltage switch cells is to connect a number of
lower voltage switches in series. This approach has been extensively practiced in
high-power/high-voltage applications such as HVDC converter systems. The main
issue in this approach is the need for simultaneous gating and the snubber circuits for
the switches that constitute a switch cell, to guarantee equal voltage sharing among the
switches. Simultaneous gating calls for precise timings and carefully laid-out wiring
to minimize the impact of parasitic effects. Snubber circuits are lossy and undesirable
in terms of compact integration. In view of the foregoing issues, multilevel converters
provide an alternative approach for high-power industrial and utility applications
[56–58].




Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                       127
128      THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


   The three-level neutral-point clamped (NPC) VSC 1 [59] is a multilevel converter
that offers an alternative to reduce (or even avoid) the number of series-connected
switches. In the three-level NPC, each switch cell has to withstand half of the DC-
side voltage. Thus, the number of switches to be connected in series can be reduced.
Moreover, the three-level NPC can provide a three-phase AC voltage with a lower
harmonic distortion compared to an equivalent two-level VSC.
   In this chapter, the three-level half-bridge NPC is introduced as the building block
for the three-level NPC. It is demonstrated that the three-level half-bridge NPC can
be considered as the combination of two two-level half-bridge converters of Figure
2.13; one half-bridge converter generates a controlled positive AC voltage, whereas
the other one generates a controlled negative AC voltage. Consequently, based on the
developments of Chapter 2 for the two-level half-bridge converter, one can deduce the
principles of operation, modeling, and control of the three-level half-bridge NPC. In
the rest of this chapter, we combine three three-level half-bridge NPCs to construct a
three-phase three-level NPC. We also present the averaged models for the three-level
NPC in αβ and dq-frames.


6.2     THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC

Figure 6.1 shows a schematic diagram of a three-level half-bridge NPC that can be
regarded as a combination of two two-level half-bridge converters of Figure 2.1 and
two additional diodes, that is, D2 and D3 . The ﬁrst half-bridge converter is composed
of the switch cells Q1−1 /D1−1 and Q4−1 /D4−1 , and the second one consists of the
switch cells Q1−2 /D1−2 and Q4−2 /D4−2 . The net DC-side voltage is split into two
equal halves and supplied by two identical voltage sources. The DC-side midpoint,
0, is connected to the three-level half-bridge NPC via the clamp diodes D2 and D3
(Fig. 6.1). All voltages in Figure 6.1 are expressed with reference to the DC-side
midpoint. As for the two-level half-bridge converter, the switching function for a
switch cell is deﬁned as
                           
                               1,   if the switch is commanded to conduct,
                  s(t) =
                               0,   if the switch is blocked.

We also note that the gating commands of Q1−1 and Q4−1 must be complementary,
that is, s1−1 + s4−1 ≡ 1. Similarly, the gating commands of Q1−2 and Q4−2 are
complementary, that is, s1−2 + s4−2 ≡ 1.


6.2.1    Generating Positive AC-Side Voltages
Assume that a positive voltage at the converter AC-side terminal t must be gen-
erated. Then, let s1−2 ≡ 0 (or equivalently s4−2 ≡ 1), corresponding to the circuit

1 Hereinafter, we refer to the three-level half-bridge NPC converter and the three-level NPC VSC as

three-level half-bridge NPC and three-level NPC , respectively.
                                                   THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC       129

                  Vp = VDC / 2          ip
                                                        Half-bridge converter #1
                  p
                                                Q1-1
                                                        D1-1


              +             iD2        D2
 VDC /2
              –

                                                Q4-2
                                                        Q4-2
                                                                       Vt
                   inp
                                                                            i
          0                      Clamp diodes      t

                                                Q4-1
                                                        D4-1

                             iD3       D3
              +
 VDC /2
              –

                                                Q1-2
                                                        D1-2

                   n                   in
                                                               Half-bridge converter #2
                  Vn = –VDC /2
              FIGURE 6.1 Circuit diagram of the three-level half-bridge NPC.


conﬁguration shown in Figure 6.2(a). Thus, when s1−1 = 1 and s4−1 = 0, Q1−1
conducts if i is positive, whereas if i is negative D1−1 conducts. Consequently, for
s1−1 = 1 and s4−1 = 0, Vt = VDC /2, regardless of the polarity of i. On the other
hand, for s1−1 = 0 and s4−1 = 1, if i is positive, D2 conducts, whereas if i is nega-
tive, Q4−1 and D3 conduct. Hence, for s1−1 = 0 and s4−1 = 1, Vt = 0, irrespective
of the polarity of i. This analysis indicates that when s1−2 ≡ 0 and s4−2 ≡ 1, de-
pending on switching states of Q1−1 and Q4−1 , the instantaneous AC-side terminal
voltage is either VDC /2 or zero. However, one can control the (positive) average of
Vt by controlling the duty ratios of s1−1 and s4−1 based on a pulse-width modulation
(PWM) switching strategy.


6.2.2   Generating Negative AC-Side Voltages
To generate a negative voltage at the converter AC-side terminal t, let s1−1 ≡ 0 (or
equivalently s4−1 ≡ 1). Figure 6.2(b) shows the corresponding circuit conﬁguration.
130              THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


         Vp = VDC / 2                   ip                                       Vp = VDC / 2         ip ≡ 0
                 p                                                                       p

                                                 Q1-1
                                                        D1-1

             +             iD2          D2                                           +          iD2     D2
VDC /2                                                                  VDC /2
             –                                                                       –

                                                                                                               Q4-2
                                                                                                                          D4-2

                     inp                                       Vt                        inp                                     Vt
                                                                    i                                                                 i
         0                                          t                            0                                    t

                                                 Q4-1
                                                        D4-1

                           iD3          D3                                                      iD3    D3
             +                                                                       +
VDC /2                                                                  VDC /2
             –                                                                       –

                                                                                                               Q1-2
                                                                                                                          D1-2

                 n                 in   ≡    0                                           n             in

             Vn = –VDC /2                                                        Vn = –VDC /2

                             (a)                                                                (b)

FIGURE 6.2 Subcircuits of the three-level half-bridge NPC corresponding to (a) positive
AC-side voltage generation and (b) negative AC-side voltage generation.



Figure 6.2(b) illustrates that for s1−2 = 1 and s4−2 = 0, D1−2 conducts if i is positive,
whereas if i is negative, Q1−2 conducts. Consequently, for s1−2 = 1 and s4−2 = 0,
Vt = −VDC /2, regardless of the polarity of i. On the other hand, for s1−2 = 0 and
s4−2 = 1, if i is positive, Q4−2 and D2 conduct, whereas if i is negative, D3 conducts.
Hence, for s1−2 = 0 and s4−2 = 1, Vt = 0, regardless of the polarity of i. Therefore,
when s1−1 ≡ 0 and s4−1 ≡ 1, the instantaneous AC-side terminal voltage is either
−VDC /2 or zero, depending on the switching states of Q1−2 and Q4−2 . However,
we can control the (negative) average of Vt by controlling the duty ratios of s1−2 and
s4−2 , based on a PWM switching strategy.
   The operation logic described here and in Section 6.2.1 justiﬁes the term three-level
for the half-bridge NPC of Figure 6.1; the AC-side terminal can assume any of the
three voltage levels −VDC /2, 0, or VDC /2.


6.3      PWM SCHEME FOR THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC

Sections 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 presented the principles of operation of the three-level half-
bridge NPC. It was demonstrated that the converter is composed of two coordinated
two-level half-bridge converters, one responsible for the positive and the other one for
the negative AC-side voltage generation. In this section, we present a PWM scheme
for the three-level half-bridge NPC to (i) coordinate the two half-bridge converters
                             PWM SCHEME FOR THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC                          131

                                                                          Gating pulses for
                                                                      half-bridge converter #1
                                                                                                  S1-1
                                                                         1
                                                   m                     0

Modulating                                                        –
  signal                                                                                          S4-1
              m                         Ts
                                 1
                                                        Carrier
  0                                                                        Gating pulses for
                    time
                                 0                                     half-bridge converter #2
              –m                                 time
                                                                                                  S1-2
                                                                  –      1
                                          –1      –m                     0


                                                                                                  S4-2

 FIGURE 6.3 Schematic diagram of the PWM scheme for the three-level half-bridge NPC.


 of Figure 6.2 and (ii) control the average value of the AC-side terminal voltage. The
 pulse-width modulator of Figure 6.3 fulﬁlls the requirements.
     The pulse-width modulator of Figure 6.3 is conceptually identical to that of Fig-
 ure 2.2 presented for a two-level half-bridge converter. However, it utilizes a unipolar
 triangular carrier signal unlike the pulse-width modulator for the two-level half-bridge
 converter. The reason is that the two half-bridge converters that constitute a three-level
 half-bridge NPC, shown in Figure 6.2(a) and (b), must generate either a positive or a
 negative voltage (and not both) at their common AC side.
     Figure 6.3 shows that the switching functions of Q1−1 and Q4−1 (Fig. 6.1) are
 obtained from the comparison of the modulating waveform m with a high-frequency
 (unipolar) carrier. Whenever m is larger than the carrier, a turn-on command is issued
 for Q1−1 and the turn-on command for Q4−1 is removed. However, to obtain switching
 functions for Q1−2 and Q4−2 , the negative of the modulating waveform, that is, −m,
 is compared with the carrier. Whenever −m is bigger than the carrier, a turn-on
 command is issued for Q1−2 and the turn-on command for Q4−2 is removed.
     When m is positive, −m is negative and therefore smaller than the carrier sig-
 nal. Consequently, s1−2 ≡ 0, s4−2 ≡ 1, and the three-level half-bridge NPC of Fig-
 ure 6.1 is equivalent to the circuit of Figure 6.2(a). As explained in Section 6.2.1,
 the AC-side terminal voltage of the circuit of Figure 6.2(a) is either VDC /2 or zero,
 depending on the states of Q1−1 and Q4−1 . The proportion of one carrier period
 over which Q1−1 is on (and Q4−1 is off) is proportional to the value of m. For a
 larger m, Q1−1 is on for a longer time period, and thus the average of Vt is more
 positive. If m = m(t) is a positive function of time and its rate of change is consid-
 erably smaller than the carrier frequency, the average of Vt can be approximated as
 the product of m(t) and the scale factor VDC /2. For instance, if m(t) represents the
 positive half-cycle of a sinusoidal waveform, the average of Vt is also the positive
 half-cycle of a sinusoid, VDC /2 times m(t). Figure 6.4(a) illustrates the PWM signals,
 the switching functions, and the AC-side terminal voltage of the converter, when m is
 positive.
132     THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


          1                                     1
         m                                     –m

          0                                      0
                                      time                                   time
        –m                                      m

        S1-1                                    S1-1
                        1

          0                                      0
                                      time                                   time
        S4-1                                    S4-1
                   1                                       1


          0                                      0
                                      time                                   time
        S1-2                                    S1-2
                                                                1

          0                                      0
                                      time                                   time
        S4-2                                    S4-2
                   1                                      1

          0                                      0
                                      time                                   time
         Vt                                      Vt
      VDC/2

          0                                      0
                                      time                                   time
                       dTs
                                             VDC/2
                        Ts                                     dTs
                                                               Ts

                       (a)                                     (b)
FIGURE 6.4 Switching functions of the three-level half-bridge NPC for (a) positive modu-
lating signal and (b) negative modulating signal.



   An analysis similar to the one described for a positive m can be conducted for a
negative m. When m is negative and thus less than the carrier signal, then s1−1 ≡ 0,
s4−1 ≡ 1, and the three-level half-bridge NPC of Figure 6.1 is equivalent to the circuit
of Figure 6.2(b). As explained in Section 6.2.2, the AC-side terminal voltage of the
circuit of Figure 6.2(a) is either −VDC /2 or zero, depending on the states of Q1−2
and Q4−2 . The proportion of one carrier period over which Q1−2 is on (and Q4−2 is
off) is determined by the value of −m. For a larger absolute value of m, −m is more
positive and thus Q1−2 conducts for a longer duration over one carrier period. This, in
                        SWITCHED MODEL OF THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC               133

turn, corresponds to a larger magnitude of (the negative) average of Vt . If m = m(t) is
a negative function of time with a rate of change considerably smaller than the carrier
frequency, the average of Vt is also a function of time proportional to m(t), with the
proportionality constant VDC /2. For instance, if m(t) is a negative half-cycle of a
sinusoidal waveform, the average of Vt is also the negative half-cycle of a sinusoid,
VDC /2 times m(t). Figure 6.4(b) illustrates the PWM signals, the switching functions,
and the AC-side terminal voltage of the converter, when m is negative.


6.4     SWITCHED MODEL OF THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC

6.4.1    Switched AC-Side Terminal Voltage
The previous sections demonstrated that the operational modes of a three-level half-
bridge NPC are determined based on the polarity of the modulating signal m. Based
on the discussions of Section 6.2.1, for a positive m the converter AC-side voltage
can be expressed as

                      Vt (t) = Vp · s1−1 (t) + 0 · s4−1 (t),   m ≥ 0,             (6.1)

where s1−1 (t) + s4−1 (t) ≡ 1. Similarly, based on the results of Section 6.2.2, for a
negative m the converter AC-side voltage is

                      Vt (t) = Vn · s1−2 (t) + 0 · s4−2 (t),   m ≤ 0,             (6.2)

where s1−2 (t) + s4−2 (t) ≡ 1. Equations (6.1) and (6.2) can be uniﬁed as

                   Vt (t) = Vp s1−1 (t)sgn(m) + Vn s1−2 (t)sgn(−m),               (6.3)

where the function sgn(·) is deﬁned as
                                          
                                              1,   x ≥ 0,
                              sgn(x) =                                            (6.4)
                                              0,   x < 0.

Figure 6.5 illustrates the switching functions and the instantaneous AC-side terminal
voltage of the three-level half-bridge NPC when m is a sinusoidal function of time.


6.4.2    Switched DC-Side Terminal Currents
Based on Section 6.2.1, for a positive m we have in ≡ 0 (Fig. 6.2(a)). To determine
ip , we employ the principle of power balance as

                             Vp · ip = Vt (t) · i(t),   m ≥ 0.                    (6.5)
134              THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


                  1                                                            m
                  0                                                            −m
        m

                                                                               carrier
                 −1
                  1
      sgn (m)




                  0
                 −1
                  1
      s 1−1




                  0
                 −1
      sgn (−m)




                  1
                  0
                 −1
                  1
      s 1−2




                  0
                 −1
                 Vp
                  0
      Vt




                 Vn
                                                     time (s)
FIGURE 6.5 Switching functions and AC-side terminal voltage of the three-level half-bridge
NPC for a sinusoidal modulating signal.


Substituting for Vt from (6.1) in (6.5), and eliminating Vp , we obtain

                                     ip = s1−1 (t) · i(t),       m ≥ 0.                  (6.6)

Based on the results of Section 6.2.2, for a negative m we have ip ≡ 0 (Fig. 6.2(b)).
Analogous to (6.5), we determine in from

                                      Vn · in = Vt (t) · i(t),     m ≤ 0.                (6.7)

Substituting for Vt from (6.2) in (6.7), and eliminating Vn , we deduce

                                       in = s1−2 (t) · i(t),      m ≤ 0.                 (6.8)

The midpoint current inp is determined through the application of KCL to the DC
source midpoint, as
                                                   -                          .
                      inp = i − (ip + in ) = i(t) − s1−1 sgn(m) + s1−2 sgn(−m) i(t).     (6.9)

   Equations (6.3), (6.4), (6.6), (6.8), and (6.9) constitute a switched model for the
three-level half-bridge NPC of Figure 6.1. In the next section, these equations are
averaged to develop an averaged model for the converter.
                       AVERAGED MODEL OF THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC                135

6.5     AVERAGED MODEL OF THREE-LEVEL HALF-BRIDGE NPC

6.5.1    Averaged AC-Side Terminal Voltage
Applying the averaging operator to both sides of (6.1), over one switching cycle, we
deduce

                                    V t (t) = V p d(t),                          (6.10)

where d(t) is the duty cycle of Q1−1 . As Figure 6.4(a) illustrates, d is equal to m.
Thus,

                              V t (t) = V p m(t),   m ≥ 0.                       (6.11)

Similarly, application of the averaging process to both sides of (6.2), over one switch-
ing cycle, yields

                                    V t (t) = V n d(t),                          (6.12)

where d(t) is the duty cycle of Q1−2 . As Figure 6.4(b) illustrates, d is equal to −m.
Hence,

                             V t (t) = −V n m(t),    m ≤ 0.                      (6.13)

Equations (6.11) and (6.13) can be uniﬁed as
                               -                        .
                      V t (t) = V p sgn(m) − V n sgn(−m) m(t),                   (6.14)

where function sgn(·) is deﬁned by (6.4). For the special case where V p = VDC /2
and V n = −VDC /2, since sgn(m) + sgn(−m) ≡ 1, (6.14) reduces to

                                 V t (t) = (VDC /2)m(t).                         (6.15)

Equation (6.15) is identical to (2.26) that was developed for the two-level half-bridge
converter.

6.5.2    Averaged DC-Side Terminal Currents
Applying the averaging operator to both sides of (6.6), we deduce

                        ip = d(t) · i(t) = m(t) · i(t),    m ≥ 0,                (6.16)

which can also be expressed as

                                 ip = m(t)sgn(m) · i(t).                         (6.17)
136      THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


Similarly, the average of (6.8) is


                        in = d(t) · i(t) = −m(t) · i(t),   m ≤ 0,                (6.18)


which can be rewritten as


                               in = −m(t)sgn(−m) · i(t).                         (6.19)


The expression for the averaged midpoint current is derived by calculating the average
of (6.9) as

                                              -                .
                     inp (t) = i(t) − m(t)i(t) sgn(m) − sgn(−m) .                (6.20)


Equations (6.4), (6.15), (6.17), (6.19), and (6.20) constitute an averaged model for
the three-level half-bridge NPC. These equations are used in the following sections
for modeling the three-level NPC.



6.6     THREE-LEVEL NPC

6.6.1    Circuit Structure
Figure 6.6 shows a schematic diagram of the three-level NPC. The three-level NPC is
composed of three identical three-level half-bridge NPCs of Figure 6.1. The DC sides
of the half-bridge NPCs are connected in parallel with, and supplied by, a split voltage
source. All the voltages are expressed with reference to the DC-side midpoint, that
is, node 0. The AC-side terminal of each half-bridge NPC is connected to one phase
of a three-phase AC system (not shown in Fig. 6.6), and the three-level NPC permits
a bidirectional ﬂow of power from the DC-side source to the three-phase AC system.
The AC system can be a passive load, an electric machine, a utility power grid, and
so on. In the three-level NPC of Figure 6.6, we index each half-bridge NPC by a, b,
or c, where each letter corresponds to one phase of the three-phase system interfaced
with the three-level NPC.


6.6.2    Principles of Operation
The AC-side terminal voltage of the three-level half-bridge NPC is governed by
(6.15). The three-level NPC of Figure 6.6 is composed of three identical three-
level half-bridge NPCs, one per phase. Thus, the voltages of the three phases are
                                                                       THREE-LEVEL NPC        137


                                          NPC half-bridge
              Vp = VDC /2               converter— phase a   phase b     phase c
                                ip

                                                    Q 1–1
                                          D2
              +
 VDC /2
              –                                      Q 4–2
                              inpa                                                 Vta   ia
                  inp         inpb                                                 Vtb   ib
          0
                              inpc                                                 Vtc   ic


              +                                      Q 4–1
 VDC /2                                   D3
              –

                                                    Q 1–2
                                in

          Vn = –VDC /2


                        FIGURE 6.6 Schematic diagram of a three-level NPC.

expressed as
                                                           VDC
                                          Vta (t) = ma (t)     ,                          (6.21)
                                                            2
                                                           VDC
                                          Vtb (t) = mb (t)     ,                          (6.22)
                                                            2
                                                           VDC
                                          Vtc (t) = mc (t)     ,                          (6.23)
                                                            2
where for the sake of compactness we have dropped the averaging overbar from
variables. Based on (6.21)–(6.23), one can control the converter AC-side terminal
voltage Vtabc (t) through mabc (t). In a VSC system, we often need to generate and
control sinusoidal voltages and/or currents. Thus, to generate a balanced three-phase
sinusoidal AC-side terminal voltage, mabc must also be a balanced three-phase
sinusoidal function of time with the required amplitude, phase angle, and frequency.
mabc (t) is usually the output of a closed-loop control system that regulates iabc . In
general, mabc assumes the following form:
                                               cos [ε(t)] ,
                                     ma (t) = m(t)                                        (6.24)
                                                               
                                                             2π
                                               cos ε(t) −
                                     mb (t) = m(t)                ,                       (6.25)
                                                              3
                                                               
                                                             4π
                                               cos ε(t) −
                                     mc (t) = m(t)                ,                       (6.26)
                                                              3

where ε(t) contains the phase-angle and frequency information.
138     THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


   In VSC systems, we also need to exercise fast changes in the amplitude and/or
the phase angle of the AC-side terminal voltage. This, based on (6.21)–(6.23), is
possible by stipulating rapid changes in amplitude and phase angle of mabc , using the
techniques presented in Chapter 4, based on the concepts of space phasor, αβ-frame,
or dq-frame. Therefore, in this chapter the αβ- and dq-frame representations of the
three-level NPC will also be introduced.


6.6.3   Midpoint Current
While the DC-side midpoint in the two-level VSC (i.e., node 0 in Fig. 5.1) is necessar-
ily neither available nor accessible, but is considered merely as the potential reference
node for circuit analysis, the DC-side midpoint of the three-level NPC of Figure 6.6
is a physical node and connected to the converter clamp diodes. In the three-level
NPC, the total DC-side voltage is split into two equal halves, and the two halves are
connected to the midpoint. In this section, we further investigate the characteristics
of the midpoint current inp .
    The midpoint current of a three-level half-bridge NPC is given by (6.20). Thus,
we deduce
                                                  -                    .
                 inpa (t) = ia (t) − ma (t)ia (t) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) ,           (6.27)
                                                  -                    .
                 inpb (t) = ib (t) − mb (t)ib (t) sgn(mb ) − sgn(−mb ) ,           (6.28)
                                                 -                    .
                 inpc (t) = ic (t) − mc (t)ic (t) sgn(mc ) − sgn(−mc ) ,           (6.29)

where the averaging overbar has been dropped from the formulation, for the sake of
compactness. The midpoint current of the three-level NPC of Figure 6.6 is given by
                                                     -                        .
               inp (t) = [ia (t) + ib (t) + ic (t)] − fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) ,   (6.30)

where
                                           -                    .
                      fa (t) = ma (t)ia (t) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) ,                 (6.31)
                                           -                    .
                      fb (t) = mb (t)ib (t) sgn(mb ) − sgn(−mb ) ,                 (6.32)
                                           -                    .
                      fc (t) = mc (t)ic (t) sgn(mc ) − sgn(−mc ) .                 (6.33)

If a three-wire connection is assumed at the AC-side of the three-level NPC, then
ia (t) + ib (t) + ic (t) ≡ 0 and (6.30) reduces to
                                      -                        .
                           inp (t) = − fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) .                  (6.34)

Thus, to evaluate inp , we must calculate fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t). Based on (6.31)–
(6.33), fa , fb , and fc are periodic functions of time and can be expressed by
their corresponding Fourier series. If the three-level NPC operates under a balanced
                                                                                   THREE-LEVEL NPC             139

condition, fabc (t) forms a balanced set of waveforms, in which fb (t) and fc (t) are
phase
-      shifted, respectively,
                         .    by −2π/3 and −4π/3 with respect to fa (t). Consequently,
 fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) is zero for any harmonic other than DC and multiples of 3.
                         =m
Under a steady state, m(t)       in (6.24)–(6.26), and the AC-side current of the three-
level NPC is

                                                            -        .
                                             ia (t) = i cos ε(t) − γ ,                                      (6.35)
                                                                          
                                                                       2π
                                             ib (t) = i cos ε(t) − γ −       ,                               (6.36)
                                                                         3
                                                                          
                                                                        4π
                                             ic (t) = i cos ε(t) − γ −      ,                               (6.37)
                                                                         3

where γ is the phase delay of the AC-side current components with respect to their
corresponding AC-side terminal voltages, that is, γ is the power-factor angle of the
three-level NPC. Substituting for ma and ia , respectively, from (6.24) and (6.35), in
(6.31), we obtain

                                         i -
                                         m                       .-                   .
                              fa (t) =        cos γ + cos(2ε − γ) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) .                     (6.38)
                                         2

In (6.38), sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) is a periodic function, as shown in Figure 6.7, and
thus can be expanded by a Fourier series as

                                                              +∞
                                                                                          
                                                        4                  1           hπ
                              sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) =                         sin                cos(hε).     (6.39)
                                                        π                  h            2
                                                             h=1,3,5,...




                                                                           sgn(ma) – sgn(−ma)
 sgn(ma) − sgn(−ma)




                                                                           ma
                      1


                      0


                 −1
                          0              1.5708          3.1416                4.7124                      6.2832
                                                          ε(rad)
FIGURE 6.7 Function (sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma )) sketched for one period, based on ma given
by (6.24).
140     THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


Substituting for sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) from (6.39) into (6.38), we obtain



                                           +∞
                                                                       
                           i
                          2m                           1            hπ
           fa (t) =            cos γ                     sin                 cos(hε)
                           π                           h             2
                                        h=1,3,5,...
                                      +∞
                                                                 
                             i
                            2m                   1            hπ
                      +                            sin                 cos(hε) cos(2ε − γ).                 (6.40)
                             π                   h             2
                                   h=1,3,5,...



                                                                   -             .
The term -cos(hε) cos(2ε
                      .  − γ) can be  decomposed   into  (1/2) cos  (h − 2)ε + γ   +
(1/2) cos (h + 2) − γ . Therefore, (6.40) can be rewritten as



                                              +∞
                                                                       
                            i
                           2m                          1            hπ
            fa (t) =            cos γ                    sin                 cos(hε)
                            π                          h             2
                                         h=1,3,5,...
                                      +∞
                                                                 
                            i
                            m                    1            hπ          -             .
                       +                           sin                 cos (h − 2)ε + γ
                            π                    h             2
                                   h=1,3,5,...
                                      +∞
                                                                 
                            i
                            m                    1            hπ          -            .
                       +                           sin                 cos (h + 2)ε − γ .                   (6.41)
                            π                    h             2
                                   h=1,3,5,...




fb (t) can be derived by replacing of ε with (ε − 2π/3) in (6.41), and similarly, fc (t)
is derived by replacing of ε with (ε − 4π/3) in (6.41). Hence, fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) is
evaluated as three times fa (t) for the DC component and the triple-n harmonics, but
it is zero otherwise. Thus,



                                                                +∞
                                                                                            
                                        i
                                       6m                                    1           hπ
       fa (t) +fb (t) + fc (t) =            cos γ                              sin                cos(hε)
                                        π                                    h            2
                                                           h=3,9,15,...
                                   +∞
                                                              
                        i
                       3m                      1           hπ          -             .
                +                                sin                cos (h − 2)ε + γ
                        π                      h            2
                               h=5,11,17,...
                                   +∞
                                                             
                        i
                       3m                     1           hπ          -            .
                +                               sin                cos (h + 2)ε − γ .                       (6.42)
                        π                     h            2
                               h=1,7,13,...
                                                                           THREE-LEVEL NPC         141

Substituting for fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) from (6.42) into (6.34), and introducing appro-
priate changes of variables for the second and third sets of terms, we deduce

                                                   +∞
                                                                             
                              i
                             6m                               1           hπ
              inp (t) = −         cos γ                         sin                cos(hε)
                              π                               h            2
                                               h=3,9,15,...
                                             +∞
                                                                         
                              i
                             3m                         1             hπ
                        +                                  sin                 cos(hε + γ)
                              π                        h+2             2
                                        h=3,9,15,...
                                             +∞
                                                                         
                              i
                             3m                         1             hπ
                        +                                  sin                 cos(hε − γ).     (6.43)
                              π                        h−2             2
                                        h=3,9,15,...


Equation (6.43) indicates that the midpoint current has no DC component. Equation
(6.43) also indicates that inp includes odd triple-n harmonics, where the third harmonic
is the dominant component. Therefore, the midpoint current can be approximated as


                   i
                  2m                               i
                                                  3m                                 i
                                                                                    3m
  inp (t) ≈            cos γ cos(3ε) −                 cos(3ε + γ) −                     cos(3ε − γ)
                   π                              5π                                 π

                     i -
                    4m                                      .
              =           −2 cos γ cos(3ε) − 3 sin γ sin(3ε) .                                  (6.44)
                    5π

Equation (6.44) can be rewritten in the following compact form:

                                             /
                                       i
                                      4m
                      inp (t) ≈               4 + 5 sin2 γ cos(3ε + ζ)
                                      5π
                                                  /
                                         i
                                        4m
                                  =                   9 − 5 cos2 γ cos(3ε + ζ),                 (6.45)
                                        5π


where ζ = π − tan−1 (1.5 tan γ). Equation (6.45) indicates that the amplitude of the
midpoint current is a function of the converter operating point. Equation (6.45) also
implies that the amplitude of inp is linearly proportional to the converter AC-side
terminal voltage and has a nonlinear relationship with the converter power factor.
Thus, the amplitude has its largest value when the three-level NPC operates at zero
power factor, that is, cos γ = 0 and assumes its smallest value when it exchanges
power at unity power factor. Based on (6.45), one can deduce the following estimate
for the amplitude of the midpoint current:

                                           i ≤ inp ≤ 0.76m
                                       0.51m                i.
142           THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


This inequality indicates that the amplitude of the midpoint current can be as high as
76% of the amplitude of the converter AC-side current, corresponding to the scenario
where the three-level NPC primarily exchanges reactive power with the AC-side
system, for example, when utilized as a static compensator (STATCOM). However,
even if the converter operates at (nearly) unity power factor, the amplitude of the
midpoint current is not less than 0.51% of that of the converter AC-side current.
Therefore, the DC-side voltage sources must accommodate a relatively large third-
harmonic midpoint current, and this can be regarded as a disadvantage of the three-
level NPC, as compared to its two-level VSC counterpart. The following example
further highlights these conclusions.

     EXAMPLE 6.1           Midpoint Current of Three-Level NPC
     Consider the three-level NPC of Figure 6.6 that is interfaced with a three-phase
     voltage source via three series RL branches. Figure 6.8(a)–(c), respectively,
     illustrate the waveforms of the converter AC-side current and fundamental
     harmonic of the AC-side voltage, the switched waveform of the midpoint
     current, and the ﬁltered waveform of the midpoint current.
         Until t =1.5 s, the converter fundamental voltage and AC-side current are in
     phase (unity power factor) (Fig. 6.8(a)) and 710 kW ﬂows out of the converter
     AC-side terminals. At t =1.5 s, the converter fundamental voltage is phase


             1000 (a)                                                    (VDC /2)ma
                                                                         ia
 ia (A)




                0

            −1000


                    (b)
             1000
 inp (A)




                0

            −1000


              750 (c)
              500
 inpf (A)




                0
            −500
            −750
               1.4          1.45            1.5             1.55            1.6
                                              time (s)

FIGURE 6.8 Midpoint current of the three-level NPC under unity and zero power-factor
conditions; Example 6.1.
                                                             THREE-LEVEL NPC        143


           720
           600
 inp (A)




           400

           200

            45
                 1      3       5       7       9      11         13       15      17
                                        harmonic order

FIGURE 6.9 Spectrum of inp when the three-level NPC operates at zero power factor;
Example 6.1.


    shifted by π/2 while the converter AC-side current is kept unchanged (Fig.
    6.8(a)). Consequently, after t =1.5 s, the power factor of the converter becomes
    zero while its apparent power remains unchanged. Since the amplitudes of the
    modulating signal and AC-side current remain unchanged, the amplitude of
    inp (t) does not change after t =1.5 s (Fig. 6.8(b)). However, as Figure 6.8(c)
    illustrates, the amplitude of the third harmonic of inp changes from about 487 A,
    corresponding to unity power-factor operation, to about 720 A, corresponding
    to zero power-factor operation.
        After t =1.5 s, the steady-state midpoint current exhibits the Fourier spec-
    trum shown in Figure 6.9. It is noted that inp possesses a dominant third har-
    monic. The next signiﬁcant harmonic is the ninth, which is less than 7% of
    the third harmonic. Higher order harmonics, for example, 15th, 21st, and so
    on, are relatively insigniﬁcant. Therefore, inp can be approximated by its third-
    harmonic component.

6.6.4       Three-Level NPC with Impressed DC-Side Voltages
To provide two identical DC-side voltage sources for the three-level NPC of Figure 6.6,
the conﬁguration of Figure 6.10 can be employed. This conﬁguration is commonly
used in industrial applications, for example, in variable-speed motor drives [60], due
to its simplicity and ruggedness. In the converter system of Figure 6.10, power is
supplied by the grid to two six-pulse diode-bridge rectiﬁers, and the three-level NPC
controls the load, for example, an asynchronous machine. The DC side of each diode
bridge is connected through a DC choke in parallel with one DC-side capacitor of
the three-level NPC (Fig. 6.10). The diode bridges are supplied from the secondary
and tertiary windings of a transformer. The bridge rectiﬁers in conjunction with the
transformer constitute a 12-pulse rectiﬁer system to ensure low current harmonic
distortion at the grid side [55]. Since the resistances of DC reactors are low, the
capacitor voltages are naturally maintained by bridge rectiﬁers at essentially half the
net DC-bus voltage.
   Salient demerits of the system of Figure 6.10 are the transformer size and the
fact that the system cannot operate as a regenerative energy conversion unit since the
144     THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC

                                                  DC reactors
              Transformer          Diode bridge #1      Vp = V DC /2


                                                              +
Grid                                                              VDC /2
                                                              –                       Vta    ia

                                                                    inp    Three-level Vtb   ib
                                   Diode bridge #2        0
                                                                              NPC
                                                                                       Vtc   ic
                                                              +
                                                                  VDC /2
                                                              –


                                                         Vn = –VDC /2

         FIGURE 6.10 A three-level NPC supplied by a 12-pulse diode rectiﬁer.

power ﬂow is unidirectional, that is, only from the grid to the load. In the next section,
we introduce an alternative conﬁguration that can be utilized for converter systems
that must operate in a bidirectional power-ﬂow environment.

6.7 THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE
DIVIDER

An alternative conﬁguration for providing two equal partial DC-side voltage sources
for the three-level NPC converter is shown in Figure 6.11. The three-level NPC of
Figure 6.11 employs a capacitive voltage divider at its DC side. If the capacitors
are (nominally) identical, the total DC-side voltage is equally divided between the
capacitors. The conﬁguration of Figure 6.11 can be augmented to constitute a back-to-
back converter conﬁguration, as shown in Figure 6.12, and thus to permit bidirectional
power exchange between the two AC systems (not shown) that are interfaced with
the three-level NPCs. Note that bidirectional power exchange is not possible with the
system shown in Figure 6.10.
    If no corrective control is employed, voltages of DC-side capacitors of VSC sys-
tems of Figures 6.11 and 6.12 drift from their nominal values, that is, half the total
DC-bus voltage. The voltage drift occurs under both steady-state and transient condi-
tions, even if the net DC-side voltage is maintained at a constant level. This problem
arises due to tolerances of the converter components and asymmetries of gating com-
mands of the switches. The second limitation of the converter systems of Figures 6.11
and 6.12 is that, due to the large third-harmonic component of the midpoint current
(see Section 6.6.3 for the analysis), each partial DC-side voltage includes a third-
harmonic ripple that in turn results in low-order voltage harmonics at the converter
AC side. To limit the harmonic voltage, DC capacitors must be adequately large. The
former issue and its solution are investigated in the next two sections while the latter
is the subject of Section 6.7.5.
                 THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER                         145


                        Vp = VDC /2            ip


                                +
                           VDC /2         2C                                    Vta    ia
                                –

                    +                          inp          Three-level         Vtb     ib
           VDC                       0
                    –                                          NPC
                                                                                Vtc    ic
                                +
                           VDC /2         2C
                                –
                                                   in

                        Vp = –VDC /2
          FIGURE 6.11 Three-level NPC with a capacitive DC-side voltage divider.



6.7.1     Partial DC-Side Voltage Drift Phenomenon
Equations (6.43) and (6.45) indicate that the midpoint current, inp (t), has no DC com-
ponent. Equations (6.43) and (6.45) are developed based on the assumptions that (i)
the three-level half-bridge NPCs that constitute the three-level NPC of Figure 6.6 are
identical and (ii) their AC-side currents constitute balanced three-phase waveforms.
Furthermore, it is implicitly assumed that the switching functions of each three-
level half-bridge NPC are perfectly symmetrical in each period of the modulating


                               ip1                                    ip2


                                               +            +
 ia1 Vta1                            2C    VDC /2       VDC /2       2C                 Vta2   ia2
                                               –            –
 ib1 Vtb1                      inp1       01                    02   inp2   Three-level Vtb2   ib2
                 Three-level
                   NPC #1                                                     NPC #2
 ic1    Vtc1                               +               +                            Vtc2   ic2
                                           VDC /2       VDC /2       2C
                                     2C
                                               –            –
                               in1                                    in2


FIGURE 6.12 Three-level NPCs with corresponding capacitive DC-side voltage dividers, in
a back-to-back converter system conﬁguration.
146     THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


waveform (see Fig. 6.5). In practice, tolerances of the circuit components in conjunc-
tion with implementation limitations, that is, digital word truncation errors, inherent
sensor offsets, and so on, result in deviations from the ideal conditions. Therefore,
inevitably, the midpoint current of each three-level half-bridge NPC and thus the
midpoint current of the three-level NPC include DC components. Although the DC
component is relatively small, it is integrated by the capacitors, and the partial DC-side
voltages drift from the nominal values [61, 65].
   A method to prevent the voltage drift phenomenon is to compensate for the DC
component of inp by means of an external converter [62]–[64]. In this method, the
(DC) voltage difference between the two capacitors is processed by a compensator that
speciﬁes the amount of current the external converter should inject into the midpoint.
The main shortcoming of this approach is the need for additional power hardware
that adds to the system cost and complexity. An alternative approach is to modify the
switching functions of each three-level half-bridge NPC, to nullify the DC component
of inp [61, 65–67]. This approach requires a more elaborate control strategy than the
previous method, but it provides an economically viable and a technologically elegant
solution to the problem. The next section presents the details of this method.


6.7.2   DC-Side Voltage Equalization
To introduce an intentional asymmetry to the switching functions to counteract the
DC-side voltage imbalance, we modify the modulating waveforms of (6.24)–(6.26) as

                                        cos [ε(t)] ,
                         ma (t) = m0 + m(t)                                        (6.46)
                                                        
                                                      2π
                                        cos ε(t) −
                         mb (t) = m0 + m(t)                ,                       (6.47)
                                                       3
                                                        
                                                      4π
                                        cos ε(t) −
                         mc (t) = m0 + m(t)                ,                       (6.48)
                                                       3

where m0 (t) is a small offset added to the sinusoidal-varying components of mabc (t).
Figure 6.13 illustrates the impact of the DC offset m0 on the switching functions
and operation of the three-level half-bridge NPC of Figure 6.1, when any of the
modulating signals (6.46)–(6.48) is given to the PWM signal generator of Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.13 shows that when a DC offset is added to the modulating signal, the time
lapse of a period during which the pair (Q1−1 , Q4−1 ) is pulse-width modulated will
be different from the time lapse during which the pair (Q1−2 , Q4−2 ) is pulse-width
modulated. Consequently, the time lapse during which inp is positive will be different
from the one during which inp is negative, and inp will assume a nonzero mean value,
that is, a DC component.
   As presented in Section 6.6.3, the midpoint current is expressed as

                                     -                        .
                          inp (t) = − fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) ,                   (6.49)
                  THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER             147

              1                                                           m
              0                                                           −m
   m


                                                                          carrier
             −1
              1
   sgn(m)




              0
             −1
              1
   s1−1




              0
             −1
              1
   sgn(−m)




              0
             −1
              1
   s1−2




              0
             −1
             Vp
   Vt




              0
             Vn
                                             time (s)
FIGURE 6.13 Switching functions and AC-side terminal voltage of the three-level half-
bridge NPC when the sinusoidal modulating signal is supplemented by a DC offset.



where

                                             -                    .
                        fa (t) = ma (t)ia (t) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) ,                (6.50)
                                             -                    .
                        fb (t) = mb (t)ib (t) sgn(mb ) − sgn(−mb ) ,                (6.51)
                                             -                    .
                        fc (t) = mc (t)ic (t) sgn(mc ) − sgn(−mc ) .                (6.52)

    To calculate fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t), we note that based on (6.46)–(6.48), ma (t),
mb (t), and mb (t) are identical in form but phase shifted with respect to each other by
−2π/3. Therefore, since iabc (t) is a balanced three-phase waveform, fa (t), fb (t),
and fc (t) are also identical in form but phase shifted by −2π/3. Consequently,
fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) is three times fa (t) with respect to DC and triple-n harmonic
components, and zero otherwise. Thus,

                                    inp0 (t) = −3fa0 (t),                           (6.53)

where the subscript 0 denotes the DC component of the corresponding variable.
Substituting for ia (t) and ma (t) in (6.50), respectively, from (6.35) and (6.46), we
148                         THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


obtain

                                                         -                    .
                                 fa (t) = m0i cos(ε − γ) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma )
                                                                -                    .
                                           i cos(ε − γ) cos(ε) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) .
                                          +m                                                         (6.54)


Using the identity cos(α) cos(β) = (1/2) cos(α − β) + (1/2) cos(α + β), (6.54) can
be expanded as

                                                           -                    .
                                   fa (t) = m0i cos(ε − γ) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma )
                                            1           -                   .
                                           + m i cos(γ) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma )
                                            2
                                            1               -                    .
                                           + m i cos(2ε − γ) sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) .                 (6.55)
                                            2

The DC component of fa (t) can be calculated from

                                                             2π
                                                        1
                                                 fa0 =             fa (θ)dθ.                         (6.56)
                                                       2π    0


In (6.55), the function sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma ) is a two-level waveform that assumes
either 1 or −1 over its period. Let us refer to the angles at which the levels change
as θ1 and θ2 , as Figure 6.14 illustrates. The dashed lines in Figure 6.14 illustrate the
waveforms corresponding to a nonzero, small, m0 , whereas the solid lines correspond
to m0 = 0. As Figure 6.14 indicates, if m0 is small, we can approximate θ1 and θ2 by
π/2 and 3π/2, respectively. Therefore, (6.56) can be rewritten as




                                                                        sgn (maa))−−sgn
                                                                        sgn(m           (−maa))
                                                                                    sgn(−m
   sgn(ma) − sgn(−ma)




                                                                        ma
                        1
                                                 θ1                       θ2

                        0


                 −1
                   0                    1.5708           3.1416                4.7124             6.2832
                                                         ε (rad)
FIGURE 6.14 Function (sgn(ma ) − sgn(−ma )) sketched for one period when ma is supple-
mented with a DC offset based on (6.46).
                 THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER                          149

                 π/2                       3π/2                         2π
        m0i
fa0 =                    cos(θ − γ)dθ −               cos(θ − γ)dθ +             cos(θ − γ)dθ
        2π        0                            π/2                        3π/2
                          π/2           3π/2           2π
            i
            m
        +       cos γ            dθ −            dθ +           dθ
            4π             0             π/2             3π/2
                 π/2                  3π/2                  2π
            i
            m
        +             cos(2θ − γ)dθ −        cos(2θ − γ)dθ +       cos(2θ − γ)dθ
            4π   0                     π/2                    3π/2

        2i cos γ
    =             m0 .                                                                          (6.57)
             π

Substituting for fa0 from (6.57) in (6.53), one concludes

                                                     6i cos γ
                                   inp0 (t) = −                m0 (t).                          (6.58)
                                                          π

Equation (6.58) suggests that the DC component of inp can be controlled by m0 .
Based on (6.58), the control transfer function is linear, but with a variable gain. The
gain is zero if either the three-level NPC AC-side current is small or the converter
operates at zero power factor. However, the gain is the largest if the three-level NPC
operates at its rated capacity and unity power factor.
   To equalize the DC components of the two DC-side voltages, a closed-loop scheme
compares them and controls m0 [61, 65]. Figure 6.15 shows a circuit model of the DC-
side voltages and the midpoint current in which partial DC-side voltages are denoted
by V1 and V2 . Figure 6.15 indicates that inp has two components: a third-harmonic
component, inp3 , and a DC component, inp0 , which are formulated by (6.45) and
(6.58), respectively. As an approximation, we assume that the capacitors are identical,
each with a capacitance of 2C.
   If VDC , that is, the net DC-side voltage, has no third-harmonic component, it can
be replaced by a short circuit. Thus, the circuit of Figure 6.15 is simpliﬁed to the
equivalent circuit of Figure 6.16(a), for the third-harmonic component. Based on
Figure 6.16(a) and since the capacitors are identical, inp3 is equally divided between
the two capacitors, and i1 = −i2 = inp3 /2, where inp3 is expressed by (6.45). Hence,
in a steady state, the third-order harmonic components of V1 and V2 are given by

                                            r3 sin(3ωt + ζ)
                                   V1 3 = V                                                   (6.59)
                                             r3 sin(3ωt + ζ),
                                   V2 3 = −V                                                  (6.60)

                                                                         r3 is
where ω = dε/dt and ζ = π − tan−1 (1.5tanγ), and the peak voltage ripple V

                                                /
                                  r3 =     i
                                            m
                                  V               9 − 5 cos2 γ.                                 (6.61)
                                           5πCω
150    THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


                     Vp = V 1                 p                  ip




                                      +
                             V1                   2C
                                      –
                                                                          inp0



                    +
            VDC                           0
                    –


                                                                         inp3
                                      +
                                 V2               2C
                                      –

                                                                in

                                              n
                      Vn = –V2
           FIGURE 6.15 Circuit model representing partial DC-side voltages.



Equation (6.61) indicates that the amplitude of the third-order harmonic component
of the partial DC-side voltages is a function of the converter operating point and
inversely proportional to the capacitance of the DC-side capacitors.
   Figure 6.16(b) illustrates a simpliﬁed circuit, equivalent to the circuit of Figure
6.15, for the DC analysis of the partial DC-side voltages and the midpoint current.
Based on Figure 6.16(b), one can deduce that i1 − i2 = inp0 , and therefore

                                d               d
                        (2C)       V1 0 − (2C) V2 0 = inp0 ,                 (6.62)
                                dt              dt

where VDC = V1 0 + V2 0 . Equation (6.62) can be expressed in the state-space
form as
                                                               
                           d                                1
                              (V1 − V2 0 ) =                       inp0 .      (6.63)
                           dt                              2C
               THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER                      151

                               ip                           is                    ip



               +                                                 +
          V1              2C                                                 2C
                                                            V1
               –                                                 –
               i1
                                                                     i1
                                    inp3                                           inp0
                                                     +
                                            VDC
                                                     –


               +                                                 +
                          2C                                                 2C
          V2                                                 V2
               –                                                 –
               i2                                                 i2
                               in                                                 in

                    (a)                                                (b)
FIGURE 6.16 Circuit equivalents to the circuit of Figure 6.15: (a) for third-harmonic
analysis; (b) for DC analysis.



Based on (6.63), the DC component of V1 − V2 , that is, V1 − V2 0 , is proportional to
the integral of inp0 . Thus, the DC component of V1 − V2 is a constant value (preferably
zero) if inp0 is zero. For an ideal condition, inp ≡ 0 corresponds to m0 ≡ 0. However,
in practice, due to imperfections and intrinsic asymmetries of the system, m0 must
assume a nonzero value to ensure that inp ≡ 0. Consequently, m0 must be inevitably
determined in a closed-loop system that attempts to regulate the DC component of
V1 − V2 at zero.
    Based on (6.63), the closed-loop voltage equalizing process requires V1 − V2 0 as
the feedback signal. However, practically, only V1 − V2 , and not its DC component,
is available for measurement. To relate V1 − V2 0 to V1 − V2 , one can express V1
and V2 as

                                                     r3 sin(3ωt + ζ),
                     V1 = V1 0 + V1 3 = V1 0 + V                                    (6.64)
                                                     r3 sin(3ωt + ζ).
                     V2 = V2 0 + V2 3 = V2 0 − V                                    (6.65)

Subtracting both sides of (6.64) from those of (6.65), we obtain

                                                      r3 sin(3ωt + ζ).
                          V1 − V2 0 = (V1 − V2 ) − 2V                                   (6.66)
152     THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


                                                           −iˆ cosγ
          Partial DC-side voltage equalizer                       Partial DC-side voltage dynamics
                  Compensator          Saturation
              e             u                       m0                 6    inp0     1
  0                  K(s)                                     X                                      V1−V2 0
          -                                                            π            2Cs


                            −iˆ cosγ                LPF

                                                    F(s)


                                                                                   2Vˆr3 sin(3ω t + ζ )
 FIGURE 6.17 Control block diagram of the partial DC-side voltage equalizing scheme.


Equation (6.66) indicates that V1 − V2 0 is equal to V1 − V2 plus a triple-frequency
component. Thus, V1 − V2 0 can be extracted through low-pass ﬁltering of V1 − V2 .
The low-pass ﬁlter can be an independent component of the closed-loop system,
although it can also be realized by a compensator that starts a steep gain roll-off at
low frequencies.
   Figure 6.17 illustrates a control block diagram of the closed-loop DC-side voltage
equalizing scheme. It is noted that a saturation block limits m0 to a small value such
               The division of the compensator output by −i cos γ corresponds to
that |m0 |  m.
a feed-forward compensation that makes the loop gain independent of the operating
point. If, for simplicity, the feed-forward signal is replaced by a constant gain, its
sign must still be included in the control loop as a multiplicative term. Otherwise,
the loop gain assumes opposite signs in inverting and rectifying modes of operation,
resulting in instability when the converter system moves from one mode of operation
to another. In Section 7.4, we further examine the block diagram of Figure 6.17 and
demonstrate the design process through Example 7.3.

6.7.3   Derivation of DC-Side Currents
Consider the three-level NPC of Figure 6.15 with node n as the circuit potential ref-
erence node. The instantaneous power, exchanged with the DC side of the three-level
NPC, is

                                                                                       VDC (t)
         PDC (t) = VDC (t)ip (t) + V2 (t)inp (t) ≈ VDC (t)ip (t) +                             inp (t). (6.67)
                                                                                         2

If the converter losses are ignored, PDC is equal to the power that ﬂows out of the
converter AC-side terminals. Thus,

                                                     VDC (t)
                                VDC (t)ip (t) +              inp (t) = Pt (t),                            (6.68)
                                                       2
              THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER               153

where

                     Pt (t) = Vta (t)ia (t) + Vtb (t)ib (t) + Vtc (t)ic (t).      (6.69)

Since Vtabc (t) and iabc (t) are balanced waveforms, Pt (t) is a DC variable. Therefore,
based on (6.68), VDC ip + (VDC /2)inp must also be a DC variable. Since inp (t) is a
periodic function with no DC component, ip (t) must inevitably have a periodic com-
ponent to cancel the periodic component of inp (t). Therefore, ip (t) can be expressed
as

                                 ip (t) = iDC (t) + ip 3 (t).                   (6.70)

Substituting for Pt (t) and ip (t) in (6.68), respectively, from (6.69) and (6.70), we
deduce

                 VDC (t)iDC (t) = Vta (t)ia (t) + Vtb (t)ib (t) + Vtc (t)ic (t)   (6.71)

and

                                   ip 3 (t) = −inp (t)/2.                       (6.72)

Therefore,

                                ip (t) = iDC (t) − inp (t)/2.                     (6.73)

Similarly, it can be shown that

                               in (t) = −iDC (t) − inp (t)/2.                     (6.74)



6.7.4   Uniﬁed Models of Three-Level NPC and Two-Level VSC
A comparison between (6.71) and (5.16) indicates that the expression for the DC-side
current of the two-level VSC is identical to the expression for (DC component of) the
DC-side current of the three-level NPC. The reasons are that (i) in either converter
conﬁguration only the DC component of the DC-side current contributes to the power
exchange and (ii) in the three-level NPC, the DC component of inp is zero if the
capacitor voltages are equal and stable. Furthermore, comparing (6.21)–(6.23) with
their counterparts for the two-level VSC, that is, (5.10)–(5.12), one concludes that the
AC-side terminal voltage of the three-level NPC assumes the same form as those of
the two-level VSC. Hence, as long as the terminal voltage/current relationships are
154      THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


concerned, there exists an equivalent two-level VSC for a three-level NPC [61]. This
equivalence property is illustrated in Figures 6.18 and 6.19.
    Figure 6.18 shows a three-level NPC for which the equivalent two-level VSC
is illustrated in Figure 6.19. Although the internal circuit structures and switching
strategies of the two converters are different, they exhibit identical dynamic behavior
if mabc and VDC are the same for both. It should be noted that the effective DC-bus
capacitor of the equivalent two-level VSC, that is, Figure 6.19, is nominally half of
each of the DC-side capacitors of the three-level NPC converter, that is, Figure 6.18.
A VSC system can employ either the two-level VSC or the three-level NPC as its
AC/DC power processor. Based on the equivalence property, hereinafter, we refer to
a two-level VSC or a three-level NPC as VSC if the converter conﬁguration is not the
main focus.

                 Ideal three-phase AC/DC power converter based on three-level NPC
            is                  ip



                    2C                            V1
                                                                              Vta ia

                         0      inp                     Three-level NPC       Vtb ib
          VDC                                              Figure 6.6
                                                                              Vtc ic
                                                  V2
                    2C

                                in

                                                             4    4   4

                                                             PWM generator
                                                              3x Figure 6.3




                             DC-side voltage balancer   m0
                                   Figure 6.17




                                                             ma mb mc
      FIGURE 6.18 Block diagram of an ideal VSC whose kernel is a three-level NPC.
                THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER            155

    Ideal three-phase AC/DC power converter based on two-level VSC
           is               iDC



                   2C
                                                                         Vta ia

                                                  Two-level VSC          Vtb ib
        VDC             0            C              Figure 5.1
                                                                         Vtc ic


                   2C


                            –iDC

                                                       2   2   2

                                                      PWM generator
                                                       3x Figure 2.2




                                                       ma mb mc
     FIGURE 6.19 Block diagram of an ideal VSC whose kernel is a two-level VSC.




   Based on the equivalence property, ﬁrst the loops to control the terminal cur-
rents/voltages of a three-level NPC can be designed using the models and methods
developed for the two-level VSC, as if a two-level VSC is the subject of control. Then,
based on the block diagram of Figure 6.17, a DC-side voltage equalizing scheme, dis-
cussed in Section 6.7.2, is designed for the three-level NPC. The DC-side voltage
balancing scheme can be designed independently of the other controllers, since the
dynamics of partial DC-side voltages are decoupled from those of terminal currents/
voltages.


6.7.5   Impact of DC Capacitors Voltage Ripple on AC-Side Harmonics
We conclude this chapter by showing that the third-harmonic components of DC
capacitor voltages of the three-level NPC generate low-order voltage harmonics at
the AC-side terminals of the converter. Let us ﬁrst assume that the DC-side voltage
156    THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC


balancer maintains the DC components of V1 and V2 at VDC /2. Thus, (6.64) and
(6.65) reduce to

                                 VDC  r3 sin(3ωt + ζ),
                            V1 =     +V                                                     (6.75)
                                  2
                                 VDC  r3 sin(3ωt + ζ).
                            V2 =     −V                                                     (6.76)
                                  2

Since Vp = V1 and Vn = −V2 , we deduce

                                VDC    r3 sin(3ωt + ζ),
                           Vp =       +V                                                    (6.77)
                                  2
                                  VDC    r3 sin(3ωt + ζ).
                           Vn = −      +V                                                   (6.78)
                                    2

Substituting for Vp and Vn in (6.14), from (6.77) and (6.78), and since m(t) =
 cos(ωt), we obtain
m

                        VDC          -                  .
                     
            Vt (t) = m        cos(ωt) sgn(m) + sgn(−m)
                          2
                                                  -                .
                            sin(3ωt + ζ) cos(ωt) sgn(m) − sgn(−m) .
                       +Vr3 m                                                               (6.79)

Since sgn(m) + sgn(−m) ≡ 1, replacing sgn(m) − sgn(−m) by its Fourier series ex-
pansion as provided by (6.39) and using the identity sin α cos β = (1/2) sin(α − β) +
(1/2) sin(α + β), we obtain

                       VDC
                   
          Vt (t) = m       cos(ωt)
                        2
                         r3 m       +∞
                                                              
                         V                    1           hπ
                  −                              sin                sin [(h − 4)ωt − ζ]
                           π                   h            2
                                 h=1,3,5,...

                         r3 m       +∞
                                                              
                         V                    1           hπ
                  +                              sin                sin [(h + 2)ωt + ζ]
                           π                   h            2
                                 h=1,3,5,...

                         r3 m       +∞
                                                              
                         V                    1           hπ
                  −                              sin                sin [(h − 2)ωt − ζ]
                           π                   h            2
                                 h=1,3,5,...

                         r3 m       +∞
                                                              
                         V                    1           hπ
                  +                              sin                sin [(h + 4)ωt + ζ] .   (6.80)
                           π                   h            2
                                 h=1,3,5,...
              THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER                157

            DC /2) cos(ωt) in (6.80) corresponds to the fundamental voltage com-
The term m(V
ponent of Vt if there is no ripple on the partial DC-side voltages. The rest of the terms
in (6.80) represent the harmonics generated due to the third-harmonic ripples of the
DC capacitor voltages. Equation (6.80) indicates that the amplitude of the fundamen-
tal component of Vt is slightly different from the one under the condition where no
ripple exists. Moreover, the fundamental component of the voltage assumes a small
phase shift as compared to the condition where no ripple exists. Furthermore, when
the DC capacitor voltages have third-harmonic ripple components, odd voltage har-
monics are generated at the AC-side terminals. The dominant voltage harmonic is the
third harmonic followed by a smaller ﬁfth harmonic. The magnitudes of higher order
voltage harmonics are insigniﬁcant.
    The amplitude change and the phase shift of the fundamental component of Vt is
practically not an issue since the closed-loop scheme controlling the converter system
corrects the modulating signals to establish the required fundamental voltage. As for
the voltage harmonics, the third-order voltage harmonic is a zero-sequence harmonic
and does not drive any current in a three-wire three-phase system. However, the
presence of ﬁfth- and possibly seventh-order harmonics can be problematic since
these harmonics can deeply penetrate into the AC system. Since based on (6.80) the
amplitudes of the harmonics are proportional to the peak value of the voltage ripple,
to keep the ripple small, the capacitors must be adequately large as (6.61) suggests.

   EXAMPLE 6.2          Low-Order AC-Side Voltage Harmonics
   Consider the three-level NPC of Figure 6.6 that is interfaced with a three-phase
   voltage source via three series RL branches. The partial DC-side voltages are
   imposed and kept constant at 750 V, and the converter switching frequency
   is 34×60 Hz. Figure 6.20(a)–(c) illustrates the waveforms of, respectively, the
   converter AC-side fundamental voltage and sinusoidal current, a ﬁltered sample
   of the midpoint current, and the partial DC-side voltages. Figure 6.21 illustrates
   the harmonic spectrum of the AC-side terminal voltage, conﬁrming that there
   is no low-order voltage harmonic between the fundamental frequency and the
   switching side-band frequencies.
       Figure 6.22 illustrates the same variables as those shown in Figure 6.20, but
   under the condition that a capacitive DC-side voltage divider is employed, while
   the net DC voltage is imposed and constant at 1500 V. Figure 6.22(c) shows
   that the partial DC-side voltages include third-harmonic ripple components
   each with an amplitude of about 50 V. Figure 6.23 illustrates the corresponding
   harmonic spectrum of the AC-side terminal voltage and indicates that the am-
   plitude of the fundamental component is slightly different from that shown in
   Figure 6.21. Figure 6.23 further indicates that the third- and ﬁfth-order harmonic
   components are also present in the AC-side terminal voltage spectrum.
158                        THREE-LEVEL, THREE-PHASE, NEUTRAL-POINT CLAMPED VSC

                                (a)
                  1000                                                            (VDC/2)ma
                                                                                  ia
 ia (A)



                            0

                 −1000


                                (b)
                     600
 inpf (A)




                            0

                  −600


                                (c)
 V1 and V2 (V)




                     800
                     750
                     700
                            0.4          0.45          0.5            0.55             0.6
                                                         time (s)

FIGURE 6.20 AC-side current and fundamental voltage, midpoint current, and partial DC-
side voltages of the three-level NPC when partial DC-side voltages are impressed by constant-
voltage sources; Example 6.2.




                           600
                 Vta (V)




                           400

                           200


                                  1                                29 31 33 35 37 39
                                                     harmonic order

FIGURE 6.21 Harmonic spectrum of the AC-side terminal voltage of the three-level NPC
of Example 6.2 when the partial DC-side voltages are impressed by constant-voltage sources.
                                 THREE-LEVEL NPC WITH CAPACITIVE DC-SIDE VOLTAGE DIVIDER          159

                               (a)
                   1000                                                              (VDC /2)ma
                                                                                     ia
 ia (A)




                           0

                 −1000


                               (b)
                      600
 inpf (A)




                           0

                  −600



                               (c)
 V1 and V2 (V)




                      800
                      750
                      700
                           0.4            0.45           0.5             0.55              0.6
                                                           time (s)

FIGURE 6.22 AC-side current and fundamental voltage, midpoint current, and partial
DC-side voltages of the three-level NPC when a capacitive voltage divider is employed;
Example 6.2.




                           600
                 Vta (V)




                           400

                           200


                                 1 3 5                                 29 31 33 35 37 39
                                                      harmonic order

FIGURE 6.23 Harmonic spectrum of the AC-side terminal voltage of the three-level NPC
of Example 6.2 when the capacitor voltages include third-harmonic ripple components.
7 Grid-Imposed Frequency VSC
          System: Control in αβ-Frame


7.1   INTRODUCTION

Chapter 5 presented dynamic models of the two-level VSC in αβ-frame and
dq-frame and brieﬂy introduced the control of a generic three-phase converter sys-
tem in those frames. Chapter 6 introduced the three-level NPC as a generalization
of the two-level VSC and established that the dynamic model of the three-level
NPC is conceptually the same as that of the two-level VSC, except that the three-
level NPC requires a DC-side voltage equalizing scheme to maintain the DC ca-
pacitor voltages, each at half the net DC-side voltage. Chapter 6 also presented
a uniﬁed model for the three-level NPC and the two-level VSC which are gener-
ically called VSC. In this chapter, we introduce and investigate the control of a
grid-imposed frequency VSC system in which the three-phase variables are sinusoidal
functions of time with a frequency that is imposed by the AC system, for example,
a power utility grid. The methodology is for the VSC and therefore covers the con-
trol of both the two-level VSC and the three-level NPC. This class of VSC systems
is often adopted for real- and reactive-power control, or for DC voltage control.
These functions constitute the main operational functions of electronically-coupled
distributed generation (DG) units, VSC-based HVDC systems, and most FACTS
controllers.


7.2   STRUCTURE OF GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM

Figure 7.1 shows the schematic diagram of a grid-imposed frequency VSC system.
The VSC can be a three-level NPC, with a DC-side voltage equalizer, or a two-level
VSC. As Figure 7.1 shows, in either case, the VSC can be modeled as a lossless
power processor with an equivalent DC-bus capacitor. A current source in parallel
with the DC side represents the VSC switching power loss, and series resistances at
the AC side, that is, switch on-state resistances, represent the conduction power loss.
The DC side of the VSC may be interfaced with either a DC voltage source or the
DC side of another power-electronic system. Each phase of the VSC is interfaced


Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

160
                                               REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                    161

                                                                                   PCC
                                         VSC system                                        AC
                                                                                         system
                                                                              Qs
                is         i DC                                               Ps
       +
                                                       Vta    ia             L           Vsa
                                                                    R+ron
                                                                                         +
                                      Averaged         Vtb    ib             L           Vsb
                                                                    R+ron
      V DC     iloss        C        ideal three-                                        +      Vnull
                                     phase VSC         Vtc                               Vsc
                                                              ic     R+ron   L
                                                                                         +




                                      ma mb mc
           FIGURE 7.1 Schematic diagram of a grid-imposed frequency VSC system.




with the corresponding phase of an AC system, via a series RL branch. Initially, we
assume an inﬁnitely stiff AC system and, thus, represent it by an ideal, three-phase,
voltage source, that is, Vsabc .1 It is also assumed that Vsabc is balanced, sinusoidal,
and with a constant frequency. The nodes where the VSC system and the AC system
are interfaced are referred to as the point of common coupling (PCC) (Fig. 7.1). The
VSC system of Figure 7.1 exchanges real- and reactive-power components Ps (t) and
Qs (t) with the AC system, at the PCC.
   Depending on the control philosophy, the VSC system of Figure 7.1 can be used
as either a real-/reactive-power controller or a controlled DC-voltage power port. In
Chapter 12, we employ the real-/reactive-power controller as part of a back-to-back
HVDC converter system. In Chapters 11, 12, and 13, we utilize the controlled DC-
voltage power port as part of the static compensator (STATCOM), the back-to-back
HVDC converter system, and variable-speed wind-power units, respectively.



7.3     REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER

The grid-imposed frequency VSC system of Figure 7.1 can be employed as a real-
/reactive-power controller. As such, the VSC DC side is connected in parallel to a DC
voltage source (not shown in Fig. 7.1). The objective is to control the instantaneous
real and reactive power delivered by the VSC system at the PCC, that is, Ps (t) and
Qs (t).

1 In Chapter 11, we investigate the dynamics of the VSC system under nonstiff AC system conditions.
162     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME




 FIGURE 7.2 Schematic diagram of a voltage-controlled real-/reactive-power controller.



7.3.1   Current-Mode Versus Voltage-Mode Control
In the VSC system of Figure 7.1, Ps and Qs can be controlled based on two dis-
tinct methods. The ﬁrst approach is schematically illustrated in Figure 7.2 and is
commonly referred to as voltage-mode control. The voltage-mode control has been
mainly utilized in high-voltage/-power applications such as in FACTS controllers [44,
45], although industrial applications have also been reported [47].
    In a voltage-controlled real-/reactive-power controller, the real and reactive power
are controlled, respectively, by the phase angle and amplitude of the VSC AC-side
terminal voltage relative to those of the PCC voltage [46]. If the amplitude and phase
angle of Vtabc are close to those of Vsabc , the real and reactive power are almost
decoupled and two independent compensators can be employed for their control
(Fig. 7.2). Thus, the voltage-mode control has the merit of being simple and having
a low number of control loops. However, since there is no control loop dedicated to
the VSC line current, the VSC is not protected against overcurrents, and the current
can undergo large excursions if the commands are changed rapidly or the AC system
is subjected to a fault.
    The second approach to control the real and reactive power in the VSC system
of Figure 7.1 is referred to as current-mode control. In this approach, ﬁrst the VSC
AC-side current is controlled by a dedicated control scheme, through the VSC termi-
nal voltage. Then, both real and reactive power are controlled by the phase angle and
the amplitude of the VSC line current with respect to the PCC voltage. Thus, due to
                                        REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER             163




 FIGURE 7.3 Schematic diagram of a current-controlled real-/reactive-power controller.


current regulation scheme, the VSC is protected against overload conditions. Other
advantages of the current-mode control include the robustness against variations in
parameters of the VSC and AC system, superior dynamic performance, and higher
control precision [68]. We demonstrated the basics of the current-mode control strat-
egy in Chapter 3 and will exclusively focus on this method throughout the rest of this
book.
   Figure 7.3 illustrates a schematic diagram of a current-controlled real-/reactive-
power controller. Figure 7.3 illustrates that the control is performed in αβ-frame.
Thus, Ps and Qs are controlled by the line current components iα and iβ . Feedback
and feed-forward signals are ﬁrst transformed to the αβ-frame and then processed by
the compensators to produce control signals in αβ-frame. Finally, the control signals
are transformed to the abc-frame and fed to the VSC (Fig. 7.3). To protect the VSC,
the reference commands iαref and iβref are limited by saturation blocks. It should
be noted that the block diagram of Figure 7.3 is a special case of the general block
diagram of Figure 4.24.


7.3.2   Dynamic Model of Real-/Reactive-Power Controller
Assume that the three-phase voltage of the AC system (Fig. 7.3) is

                              s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ),
                    Vsa (t) = V                                                   (7.1)
                                                    
                              s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 2π ,
                    Vsb (t) = V                                                   (7.2)
                                                   3
164     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME

                                                     
                                s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π ,
                      Vsc (t) = V                                                   (7.3)
                                                    3

where Vs is the peak value of the line-to-neutral voltage, ω0 is the source (constant)
frequency, and θ0 is the initial phase angle. Based on (4.56) and (4.57), the real and
reactive power delivered to the AC system are

                           3-                             .
                  Ps (t) =   Vsα (t)iα (t) + Vsβ (t)iβ (t) ,                        (7.4)
                           2
                           3-                                .
                  Qs (t) =    −Vsα (t)iβ (t) + Vsβ (t)iα (t) ,                      (7.5)
                           2

where Vsα and Vsβ are the source αβ-frame components and cannot be controlled.
Thus, based on (7.4) and (7.5), iα and iβ must be controlled to exercise con-
trol over Ps (s) and Qs (s). This calls for the following reference commands for iα
and iβ :

                      2    Vsα                2    Vsβ
        iαref (t) =               Psref (t) +             Qsref (t),                (7.6)
                      3 Vsα + Vsβ
                         2      2             3 Vsα + Vsβ
                                                 2      2

                      2    Vsβ                2    Vsα
        iβref (t) =               Psref (t) −             Qsref (t).                (7.7)
                      3 Vsα + Vsβ
                         2      2             3 Vsα + Vsβ
                                                 2      2



If the control system ensures a fast command tracking performance, that is, iα ≈ iαref
and iβ ≈ iβref , then Ps ≈ Psref and Qs ≈ Qsref . Equations (7.6) and (7.7) suggest
that Ps (t) and Qs (t) can be independently controlled. This is the salient feature of the
αβ-frame control strategy.
    Dynamics of the AC side of the VSC system of Figure 7.1 are described by

                dia
              L     = −(R + ron )ia + Vta − Vsa − Vnull ,                           (7.8)
                dt
                dib
              L     = −(R + ron )ib + Vtb − Vsb − Vnull ,                           (7.9)
                dt
                dic
              L     = −(R + ron )ic + Vtc − Vsc − Vnull .                          (7.10)
                dt

                                          2π       4π
Then, based on (4.2) and since ej0 + ej 3 + ej 3 ≡ 0, (7.8)–(7.10) can be represented
by the space-phasor equation

                        →
                        −
                       d i              → −
                                        −    → −  →
                   L       = −(R + ron ) i + Vt − Vs ,                             (7.11)
                        dt
                                                REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                     165

                                                →
                                                −
in which Vnull does not appear. Substituting for f = fα + jfβ in (7.11), and splitting
the resultant into real and imaginary parts, we deduce

                      diα
                    L     = −(R + ron )iα + Vtα − Vsα ,                                           (7.12)
                      dt
                      diβ
                    L     = −(R + ron )iβ + Vtβ − Vsβ .                                           (7.13)
                      dt
Expressing Vtα and Vtβ in terms of mα and mβ , respectively, in (7.12) and (7.13), we
deduce
                  diα                   VDC
                L     = −(R + ron )iα +     mα − Vsα ,                                            (7.14)
                  dt                     2
                  diβ                   VDC
                L     = −(R + ron )iβ +     mβ − Vsβ .                                            (7.15)
                  dt                     2
Equations (7.12) and (7.13), or their equivalents (7.14) and (7.15), form a basis for
the control of the VSC system of Figure 7.3.

7.3.3     Current-Mode Control of Real-/Reactive-Power Controller
Based on (7.14) and (7.15), Figure 7.4 illustrates a control block diagram of the
real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 7.3. Figure 7.4 shows that the control plant

                                           Feed-forward filter       Vsa
                                                  Gff (s)
             a -axis controller                                           a -axis subsystem
                    a-axis compensator
                                                                         –
                 ea                       ua        ma            Vta               1
  iaref                  ka (s)                               x                                    ia
                –                                                               Ls+(R+ron)



                                               V DC/2       V DC/2

                                           Feed-forward filter          Vsb
                                                  Gff (s)
             b -axis controller                                               b -axis subsystem
                    b -axis compensator
                 eb                       ub                              –
                                                    mb            Vtb               1
  ibref                  kb (s)                               x                                    ib
                –                                                               Ls+(R+ron)



                                               V DC/2       V DC/2

FIGURE 7.4 Control block diagram of the current-control loops of the VSC system of Figure
7.3, in αβ-frame.
166     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


consists of two subsystems: One is α-axis subsystem described by (7.14) and the
other is β-axis subsystem described by (7.15). It is noted that α- and β-axis sub-
systems are decoupled and controlled independently. Thus, the reference commands
iαref and iβref are determined using (7.6) and (7.7), based on the required real- and
reactive-power components. Since Vsabc is sinusoidal, so are Vsα , Vsβ , iαref , and iβref .
Therefore, to ensure command tracking with small steady-state errors, the bandwidth
of the closed-loop control system must be selected to be adequately larger than the
AC system frequency. Alternatively, the loop gain can be made very large at the AC
system frequency. The latter approach corresponds to the inclusion of one pair of
complex-conjugate poles in each of the compensators kα (s) and kβ (s); the compen-
sators require additional poles and zeros to ensure desired phase and gain margins
(see Example 3.6), and typically are of high dynamic orders. Therefore, to simplify
the design process, a class of compensators with one pair of complex-conjugate poles
and only two gain parameters has been proposed in the literature [69]. Thus, this
class of compensators, referred to as stationary-frame generalized integrator [39] or
proportional+resonant compensator (P+Resonant) [40], is analogous to the conven-
tional PI compensator as it has only two parameters to tune.
    It should be emphasized that each control loop in Figure 7.4, that is, the α-
or β-axis control loop, is equivalent to the control loop presented in Figure 3.6
for the half-bridge converter. Therefore, the compensator design for α- and β-axis
loops should follow the same steps as outlined for the system of Figure 3.6, in
Example 3.6.

   EXAMPLE 7.1            Dynamic Performance of Real-/Reactive-Power
   Controller
   Consider the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 7.3 with the parameters
   L = 100 ␮H, R = 0.75 m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC = 1450 V, and
   fs = 3420 Hz. Assume that the VSC system is connected at the PCC to a stiff
   utility grid with a line-to-line rms voltage of 480 V, corresponding to Vs =
   391 V, and with ω0 = 377 rad/s. Following the guidelines of Example 3.6, one
   obtains the following compensator for each control loop in Figure 7.4:

        kα (s) = kβ (s)
                                                                       
                               s + 16.34          s + 966          s+2
              = 1258                                                            [].   (7.16)
                              s2 + (377)2        s + 5633        s + 0.05

   Note that the compensator includes one pair of complex-conjugate poles at
   ω0 = 377 rad/s, to ensure zero steady-state error, and it provides a closed-loop
   bandwidth of about ωb = 3820 rad/s (see Example 3.6 for details). The transfer
   function of the feed-forward ﬁlter is Gff (s) = 1/(8 × 10−6 s + 1). Figure 7.5
   illustrates the time response of the closed-loop system to the start-up process
   and step changes in Psref and Qsref .
       For the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 7.3, initially the gating
   pulses are blocked and the controllers are inactive. At t = 0.1 s, the gating
                                              REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER          167

              2000
Ps (kW)

              1000
                 0
             −1000
             −2000
Qs (kVAr)




              1000
               500
                 0
              −500
             −1000
Vsa and ia




              5000
                         10 Vsa
                 0       ia
             −5000
                 0.05          0.1     0.1372                0.2        0.25           0.3
                                                  time (s)
               FIGURE 7.5 Dynamic responses of real and reactive power; Example 7.1.




     pulses are unblocked and the controllers are activated while Psref = Qsref ≡ 0.
     Therefore, the line current remains at zero and no (average) real or reactive
     power is exchanged; small ripples in instantaneous values of ia , Ps and Qs
     (Fig. 7.5) are due to the pulse-width modulation (PWM) switching harmonics.
     At t = 0.1372 s and t = 0.20 s, Psref is changed from 0 to 1.0 MW and from 1.0
     to −1.0 MW, respectively. At t = 0.25 s, Qsref is changed from 0 to 500 kVAr.
         Figure 7.5 illustrates that Ps and Qs rapidly follow their respective com-
     mands. However, the responses of Ps and Qs are not perfectly decoupled from
     each other. The reason is that a perfect decoupled control of Ps and Qs re-
     quires iα and iβ to instantly follow their corresponding reference commands
     issued based on (7.6) and (7.7). However, due to the limited bandwidth of α-
     and β-axis closed-loop systems, iα and iβ are limited in terms of the speed
     of response and thus Ps and Qs are somewhat coupled. Figure 7.5 also shows
     the grid phase-a voltage waveform, that is, Vsa , and the converter phase-a cur-
     rent waveform, that is, ia . Figure 7.5 shows that ia is (i) in phase with Vsa when
     (Ps , Qs ) = (1.0 MW, 0), (ii) 180◦ lagging Vsa when (Ps , Qs ) = (−1.0 MW, 0),
     and (iii) 153◦ lagging Vsa when (Ps , Qs ) = (−1.0 MW, 0.5 MVAr).
         To provide more details into the αβ-frame control, we show in Figure 7.6
     a number of important variables of the control system of Figure 7.4.
     Figure 7.6 shows that iαref (and iβref ) is zero until t = 0.1372 s. Therefore,
     the α-axis (and β-axis) controller imposes uα (and uβ ) to be equal to Vsα (and
     Vsβ ). This ensures that there is no voltage drop across the interface inductors
     and, thus, iα (and iβ ) remains zero. Figure 7.6 also shows that iαref (and iβref )
     is changed to a nonzero value at t = 0.1372 s. Consequently, the α-axis (and β-
     axis) controller accordingly changes uα (and uβ ) with respect to Vsα (and Vsβ ),
168            GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


               500
   Vsαβ (V)

                                                                                  Vsα
                 0                                                                Vsβ

              −500

                                                                                   uα
   uαβ (V)




               500                                                                 uβ
                 0
              −500

              2000                                                              iαref
 iα (A)




                 0                                                              iα
          −2000

              2000                                                              iβref
 iβ (A)




                 0                                                              iβ
          −2000
              0.12         0.13   0.1372          0.15        0.16       0.17           0.18
                                                time (s)
          FIGURE 7.6 Dynamic responses of α-axis and β-axis controllers; Example 7.1.


    to generate the required voltage drop across the interface inductors and regu-
    late iα (and iβ ) at its reference command. It should be noted that the outputs
    of α- and β-axis controllers, that is, uα and uβ , are equivalent to the αβ-frame
    components of the fundamental harmonic of the VSC AC-side terminal voltage.


7.3.4          Selection of DC-Bus Voltage Level
In the VSC system of Figure 7.3, the DC-bus voltage must be adequately large for
proper operation of the VSC, under both steady-state and dynamic conditions. In this
section, we develop an expression for the amplitude of the VSC AC-side voltage and
also identify factors that must be considered in the selection of the DC-bus voltage.
   Consider the VSC system of Figure 7.3 and that the AC system voltage at the
PCC, that is, Vsabc , is given by (7.1)–(7.3). Let the VSC AC-side terminal voltage and
current be

                                     t cos (θ + δ) ,
                           Vta (t) = V
                                                        
                                                     2π
                           Vtb (t) = Vt cos θ + δ −       ,
                                                       3
                                                        
                                     t cos θ + δ − 4π ,
                           Vtc (t) = V                                                  (7.17)
                                                       3
                                            REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER            169

and

                        ia (t) = i cos (θ − φ),
                                                   
                                                 2π
                        ib (t) = i cos θ − φ −      ,
                                                  3
                                                   
                                                 4π
                        ic (t) = i cos θ − φ −      ,                              (7.18)
                                                  3

where θ = ω0 t + θ0 ; δ and −φ are, respectively, the phase shifts of Vtabc and iabc
with respect to Vsabc . Under steady-state conditions, φ is the power-factor angle of
the VSC system, in the conventional phasor analysis sense. Based on (4.2), the space
phasors corresponding to Vsabc and iabc are

                               →
                               −         s ejθ ,
                               V s (t) = V                                          (7.19)


                              →
                              −
                               i (t) = ie−jφ ejθ .                                 (7.20)

                 →
                 −       →
                         −
Substituting for V s and i in (4.38) and (4.40), one obtains the real and reactive
power delivered to the AC system as

                                  3 
                              Ps = iVs cos φ,                                      (7.21)
                                  2
                                   3 
                              Qs = iV s sin φ.                                     (7.22)
                                   2

Equations (7.21) and (7.22) are rearranged as
                                              
                          i cos φ = Ps /  3
                                             Vs ,                                   (7.23)
                                           2
                                              
                          i sin φ = Qs / 3 Vs .                                   (7.24)
                                           2

Based on (4.46), the α-axis components of Vsabc , Vtabc , and iabc are

                  s cos θ,
            Vsα = V                                                                 (7.25)
                                  t cos δ cos θ − V
                  t cos(θ + δ) = V
            Vtα = V                                t sin δ sin θ,                  (7.26)
            iα = i cos(θ − φ) = i cos φ cos θ + i sin φ sin θ.                   (7.27)

Substituting for i cos φ and i sin φ in (7.27), from (7.23) and (7.24), substituting for
Vsα , Vtα , and iα in (7.12), from (7.25), (7.26), and (7.27), and assuming (R + ron ) ≈ 0,
170         GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


we obtain
                                        #              $
      2L        d                                      s cos θ − V
                                            t cos δ − V          t sin δ sin θ.
                   (Ps cos θ + Qs sin θ) = V                                          (7.28)
       s
      3V        dt

We note that the assumption of (R + ron ) ≈ 0 is reasonable since the AC-side interface
circuit is predominantly inductive and its impedance is approximately equal to the
reactance of the interface reactor, that is, Lω0 (in Example 7.1, Lω0 ≈ 23(R + ron )).
   Calculating the derivatives in (7.28) and equating the corresponding coefﬁcients
of cos θ and sin θ in the resultant, we obtain
                                                        
                      t cos δ = V
                                 s +  2L      dPs
                      V                            + ω0 Qs ,                          (7.29)
                                        s
                                       3V       dt
                                                     
                      t sin δ = 2L        dQs
                      V                  −      + ω 0 Ps ,                            (7.30)
                                   s
                                  3V        dt

where ω0 = dθ/dt is the AC system frequency. Squaring both sides of (7.29) and
(7.30), and adding the corresponding sides of the resultants, we deduce

                              !                  2 #          $  4Lω 
                   t (t) =
                   V           Vs2 + 4 Lω0            Ps2 + Q2s +
                                                                              0
                                                                                 Qs
                                        9     
                                             Vs                            3
                                           %                             &
                                4 Lω0 2            1 dPs 2         1 dQs 2
                              +                               +
                                9      s
                                       V           ω0 dt          ω0 dt
                                %                           &           
                                  4Lω0        8 Lω0 2             1 dPs
                              +           +                Qs
                                     3        9    s
                                                   V              ω0 dt
                                %                   &           " 21
                                     8 Lω0 2               1 dQs
                              + −                  Ps                    .            (7.31)
                                     9     s
                                           V              ω0 dt

Equation (7.31) expresses the amplitude of the VSC AC-side terminal voltages under
steady-state and transient conditions; individual phase voltages are given by (7.17).
Based on (5.10)–(5.12), the following modulating signal is required to generate the
AC-side terminal voltage (7.17):

                                    t (t) cos (ω0 t + θ0 + δ) ,
                  ma (t) = (2/VDC ) V
                                                                   
                                                                2π
                  mb (t) = (2/VDC ) Vt (t) cos ω0 t + θ0 + δ −       ,
                                                                  3
                                                                   
                                    t (t) cos ω0 t + θ0 + δ − 4π .
                  mc (t) = (2/VDC ) V                                                 (7.32)
                                                                  3
                                                REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER          171

It then follows from (7.32), subject to the constraints

                                 −1 ≤ ma (t) ≤ 1,
                                 −1 ≤ mb (t) ≤ 1,
                                 −1 ≤ mc (t) ≤ 1,

that the following inequality must be ensured:

                                   t (t) ≤ VDC .
                                   V                                                  (7.33)
                                             2

    Inequality (7.33) indicates a substantial limitation of the PWM-controlled VSC;
that is, if |m| ≤ 1, the maximum fundamental AC-side voltage of the VSC cannot
be larger than half the DC-bus voltage. If |m| > 1, the fundamental AC-side voltage
is larger than VDC /2 and the modulation process is called overmodulation [16]. The
overmodulation results in low-order harmonics in the AC voltage spectrum, and thus
in this text we conﬁne our investigations to |m| ≤ 1.
    Based on (7.31), the maximum AC-side voltage of the VSC, V           t (t), is composed
of steady-state and transient components. The steady-state component is determined
based on the steady-state values of Ps and Qs , whereas the transient component is a
function of dPs /dt and dQs /dt. The worst-case scenario corresponds to the condition
that dPs /dt and dQs /dt are large (i.e., Ps and Qs are rapidly changed) while the VSC
system operates near its rated operating condition; this scenario corresponds to a large
value of Vt . Under a steady state, the derivative terms are zero and (7.31) is simpliﬁed to
             2                    2                                
                             Lω0        0            1
      t =
      V        s2 + 4
               V                            Ps2 + Q2s +
                                                               4Lω0
                                                                          Qs .        (7.34)
                     9        s
                              V                                  3

                 s and, therefore, (7.34) can be further simpliﬁed to
Typically, Lω0  V
                             2                     
                     t ≈      s2 +         4Lω0
                     V         V                        Qs .                          (7.35)
                                               3

    Equation (7.35) suggests that, under steady-state conditions, the maximum am-
plitude of the VSC AC-side terminal voltage is primarily affected by the amount of
the reactive power. Figure 7.7 plots the ratio V    s as a function of Ps and Qs , based
                                                t /V
on the parameters of Example 7.1. Figure 7.7(a) illustrates V        s versus Qs , when
                                                                 t /V
Qs is varied from −1.0 to 1.0 MVAr, while Ps ≡ 0. In Figure 7.7(a), we refer to
the result obtained based on (7.35) as approximate and to those of (7.34) as exact.
Figure 7.7(a) shows that V t /V
                               s is unity for Qs = 0 and approximately linearly pro-
portional to Qs . Figure 7.7(b) shows that V                                     s for a
                                             t is always negligibly larger than V
                                                    
nonzero real power if Qs ≡ 0. Thus, the ratio Vt /Vs can be assumed to be independent
of Ps .
172              GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


                  1.3
                               Approximate
                  1.2
                               Exact
                  1.1
      ˆ t /Vˆs


                    1
      V




                  0.9
                  0.8
                                                                                             (a)
                  0.7
                           −1               −0.5               0                   0.5   1
                                                          Qs (MVAr)
                 1.02
                               Approximate
            1.015              Exact
                 1.01
 ˆ t /Vˆs
 V




            1.005

                    1
                                                                                             (b)
            0.995
                           −1               −0.5                  0                0.5   1
                                                              Ps (MW)

FIGURE 7.7 Variations of the normalized VSC AC-side terminal voltage versus (a) reactive
power, when Ps ≡ 0, and (b) real power, when Qs ≡ 0.


   Equation (7.31) can also be simpliﬁed such that it includes the impact of transients
of Ps and Qs on the amplitude of the AC-side terminal voltage. Assuming Lω0  V     s ,
(7.31) is simpliﬁed to
                               2                                    
                    t (t) ≈    s2 +       4Lω0                  4L       dPs
                    V           V                      Qs +                    .              (7.36)
                                              3                    3        dt

A comparison between (7.36) and (7.35) reveals that the transient component of V        t
is primarily due to the changes in Ps ; the faster a change takes place, the larger is the
                                                                
transient component. / Based on (7.36), if Ps does not change, Vt is equal to its steady-
                      s2 +
state value, that is, V     4Lω 0                                     t becomes larger
                                  Qs , as formulated by (7.35). Then, V
                                        3
(smaller) than its steady-state value if Ps starts to increase (decrease). Depending on
the value of L and the rise time of Ps (t), the deviation of V   t from its steady-state
value can be signiﬁcant. For example, Figure 7.8 illustrates variations of V     t in re-
sponse to changes in Ps and Qs , in the VSC system of Example 7.1. Figure 7.8
shows that until t = 0.25 s where Qs ≡ 0, the steady-state value of V      t is equal to
                           
Vs = 391 V. However, Vt overshoots to about 725 V and then reverts to its
predisturbance value when Ps rapidly changes from 0 to 1.0 MW at t = 0.1372
s. At t = 0.2 s, Ps rapidly decreases from 1.0 to −1.0 MW, and thus V   t undergoes an
                                         REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER               173




FIGURE 7.8 Variations of the amplitude of the AC-side terminal voltage in response to
changes in real and reactive power of the VSC; Example 7.1.


undershoot down to about 40 V. Figure 7.8 also shows that, as predicted by (7.36), a
rapid change in Qs (from zero to 500 kVAr at t = 0.25 s) does not result in a transient
overshoot or undershoot in V  t but shifts the steady-state value of V t to a different
(larger) value.
   It is understood from the foregoing discussion that V  t (t) can have a large peak if
Ps is rapidly increased while Qs is settled at a positive value. Usually, the instants at
which Qs and/or Ps are commanded to change are not known in advance. Therefore,
in view of (7.32), the worst-case scenario corresponds to the instant when V   t (t) peaks
while cos(ω0 t + θ0 + δ), cos(ω0 t + θ0 + δ − 3 ), or cos(ω0 t + θ0 + δ − 3 ) is equal
                                                2π                            4π

or close to +1 or −1. To accommodate the worst-case scenario, VDC must be selected
in accordance with (7.33). In Example 7.1, as Figure 7.9 shows, V       t (t) reaches its
maximum value at about t = 0.1372 s when cos(ω0 t + θ0 + δ) ≈ 1. Hence, ma (t)
also reaches its maximum value of unity (Fig. 7.9).

7.3.5   Trade-Offs and Practical Considerations
As discussed in Section 7.3.4, since the DC-bus voltage must be larger than twice
                                                  t (t) small. To this end, as (7.36) sug-
t (t) (inequality (7.33)), it is desired to keep V
V
gests, L should be selected to be small and/or the rate of change of Ps must be
limited. Practically, a small value for L requires a relatively large PWM switching
frequency to ensure low harmonic distortion of the VSC AC-side current. However,
174           GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


             725
 Vtαβ (V)

             391                                                               Vtα
               0                                                               Vtβ
            −391                                                                Vˆt


                1                                                               mα
             0.54
 mαβ




                                                                                mβ
                0                                                               ˆ
                                                                                m
            −0.54


                1                                                               ma
 mabc




             0.54                                                               m
                0                                                               mcb
            −0.54
                0.13    0.1372               0.15               0.16   0.17          0.18
                                                     time (s)
              FIGURE 7.9 PWM modulating signals of the VSC system of Example 7.1.


the VSC loss increases as the switching frequency is increased (see (5.9)). Therefore,
there is often a trade-off between the DC-bus voltage level and the PWM switching
frequency.
   On the other hand, to limit dPs /dt, changes in Psref must be gradual. This is
in contradiction to fast control of Ps and Qs . However, Psref is often the output
of an outer control loop of which the bandwidth is considerably smaller than that
of the α- and β-axis current controllers. Thus, the outer control loop cannot exer-
cise step changes in Psref . If Ps is directly controlled in a particular application,
Psref can be passed through a rate limiter. However, applications similar to Ex-
ample 7.1 in which Psref and/or Qsref are changed stepwise are not common in
practice.

7.3.6         PWM with Third-Harmonic Injection
7.3.6.1 Principle of Operation As discussed in Section 7.3.4, depending on the
requirements for the VSC system steady-state and dynamic operations, relatively
high levels of voltage may be required at the VSC AC-side terminals. Based on the
developments of Chapters 2 and 6, the (averaged) AC-side terminal voltage of the
half-bridge converter and the three-level half-bridge NPC is

                                                 VDC
                                 Vt (t) = m(t)       ,                              (7.37)
                                                  2

where the modulating signal m(t) can be a function of time subject to −1 ≤ m(t) ≤ 1.
Thus, the AC-side terminal voltage of each phase of the VSC is constrained
by −VDC /2 ≤ Vt (t) ≤ VDC /2. The third-harmonic injected PWM is an approach
to extend the range of Vt (t) [70].
                                          REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER               175

   As presented in Chapters 5 and 6, the three-phase modulating signal of VSC can
be expressed as


                                   cos [ε(t)],
                         ma (t) = m(t)                                               (7.38)
                                                  
                                                2π
                                   cos ε(t) −
                         mb (t) = m(t)              ,                                (7.39)
                                                 3
                                                  
                                                4π
                                   cos ε(t) −
                         mc (t) = m(t)              ,                                (7.40)
                                                 3


         is the amplitude of the modulating signal mabc (t) and, in general, is a
where m(t)
function of time. Under transient conditions, depending on the disturbances and the
                                           can have large overshoots. Since the
closed-loop bandwidth of the controllers, m(t)
                   reaches a peak is not known upfront, one must ensure that
instant at which m(t)
 ≤ 1, so that −1 ≤ mabc (t) ≤ 1.
m(t)
   The method of third-harmonic injected PWM modiﬁes the modulating signals
(7.38)–(7.40) as


                               1
                                  cos 3ε,
                       cos ε − m(t)
         maug-a (t) = m(t)                                                           (7.41)
                               6
                                                     
                                 2π    1             2π
                       cos ε −
         maug-b (t) = m(t)                cos 3 ε −
                                      − m(t)             ,                           (7.42)
                                  3    6              3
                                                     
                                 4π    1             4π
                       cos ε −
         maug-c (t) = m(t)                cos 3 ε −
                                      − m(t)             .                           (7.43)
                                  3    6              3


As indicated by (7.41)–(7.43), maug-b and maug-c have the same forms as maug-a
but are phase shifted, respectively, by −2π/3 and −4π/3 with respect to maug-a .
Therefore, we focus on maug-a to study the properties of maug-abc . Figure 7.10(a) and
(b), respectively, illustrates the waveforms of ma and maug-a , when m        = 1. Under
this condition, any further increase in m  would result in the overmodulation, if the
conventional PWM was used (Fig. 7.10(a)). However, since the peak value of maug-a
                                   can be increased to 1.15, that is, to 1/0.869, if maug-a
is equal to 0.869 (Fig. 7.10(b)), m
is used as the PWM modulating signal. Hence, the amplitude of the AC-side terminal
voltage can be increased by about 15% for a given DC-bus voltage or, alternatively,
the DC-bus voltage can be reduced by about 13% for a given amplitude of the AC-side
terminal voltage.
    Let us prove that if maug-abc is employed as the PWM modulating signal, the VSC
system dynamic and steady-state characteristics remain the same as those under the
case where mabc is used. Thus, with maug-abc as the PWM modulating signal, based
176            GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


                    1.5
                              (a)                                              ma
                      1                                                        carrier
                    0.5
      ma




                     0
                   −0.5
                     −1
                   −1.5



                              (b)                                              maug-a
                0.869                                                          carrier
      maug-a




               −0.869

                          0             3.14         6.28              9.42          12.56
                                                    e (rad)
FIGURE 7.10 Modulating signal corresponding to (a) conventional sinusoidal PWM and (b)
third-harmonic injected PWM.


on (7.37) the VSC AC-side terminal voltages are

                                      VDC              VDC
                                 
                   Vtaug−a (t) = m(t)             
                                          cos ε − m(t)      cos 3ε,                      (7.44)
                                       2                12
                                                      
                                      VDC           2π           VDC
                                 
                   Vtaug−b (t) = m(t)     cos ε −           
                                                          − m(t)     cos 3ε,             (7.45)
                                       2             3            12
                                                      
                                      VDC           4π           VDC
                                 
                   Vtaug−c (t) = m(t)     cos ε −           
                                                         − m(t)      cos 3ε,             (7.46)
                                       2             3            12

       ≤ 1.15. Adding the corresponding sides of (7.44)–(7.46), one obtains
where m(t)

                                                                VDC
                                                         
                          Vtaug−a + Vtaug−b + Vtaug−c = −m(t)       cos 3ε.              (7.47)
                                                                 4

With reference to the VSC system of Figure 7.3, adding the corresponding sides of
(7.8)–(7.10), one deduces

                   d
               L      (ia + ib + ic ) = − (R + ron ) (ia + ib + ic )
                   dt
                        0                               1
                    + Vtaug−a + Vtaug−b + Vtaug−c − (Vsa + Vsb + Vsc ) − 3Vnull .        (7.48)
                                       REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER           177

Since the VSC AC-side interface is a three-wire connection, (ia + ib + ic ) ≡ 0.
Thus, substituting in (7.48) for Vsabc from (7.1)–(7.3), and for (Vtaug−a + Vtaug−b +
Vtaug−c ) from (7.47), we deduce
                                         VDC
                                  
                         Vnull = −m(t)        cos 3ε.                         (7.49)
                                          12
Equation (7.49) indicates that the third-harmonic component of the PWM modulat-
ing signal is ampliﬁed by VDC /2 and appears at the AC-side neutral point. The same
would be true if the modulating signal included any other triple-n harmonic com-
ponent. As stated in Section 4.2.4, the space phasors corresponding to the triple-n
harmonics of a balanced three-phase waveform are of zero length and referred to
as zero-sequence harmonics. In general, zero-sequence components of modulating
signal would be ampliﬁed by VDC /2 and appear at the AC-side neutral point.
   Substituting in (7.8)–(7.10) for Vtaug−abc from (7.44)–(7.46), and for Vnull from
(7.49), we obtain

        dia                        VDC
      L                       
            = −(R + ron )ia + m(t)     cos ε − Vsa ,                          (7.50)
        dt                          2
                                                    
        dib                        VDC           2π
      L                       
            = −(R + ron )ib + m(t)     cos ε −         − Vsb ,                (7.51)
        dt                          2             3
                                                    
        dic                        VDC           4π
      L                       
            = −(R + ron )ic + m(t)     cos ε −         − Vsc ,                (7.52)
        dt                          2             3

       ≤ 1.15. Comparing (7.38)–(7.40) and (7.50)–(7.52), we deduce
where m(t)
                 dia                   VDC
               L     = −(R + ron )ia +     ma − Vsa ,                         (7.53)
                 dt                     2
                 dib                   VDC
               L     = −(R + ron )ib +     mb − Vsb ,                         (7.54)
                 dt                     2
                 dic                   VDC
               L     = −(R + ron )ic +     mc − Vsc .                         (7.55)
                 dt                     2

Equations (7.53)–(7.55) indicate that the third harmonic of the modulating signal
maug-abc has no impacts on the system transient and steady-state behavior. The space-
phasor representation of (7.53)–(7.55) is
                    →
                    −
                   d i              → Vdc −
                                    −      →   →
                                               −
               L       = −(R + ron ) i +   m − Vs ,                           (7.56)
                    dt                   2

corresponding to the following αβ-axis equations:
                 diα                   VDC
               L     = −(R + ron )iα +     mα − Vsα ,                         (7.57)
                 dt                     2
                 diβ                   VDC
               L     = −(R + ron )iβ +     mβ − Vsβ ,                         (7.58)
                 dt                     2
178     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


which are identical to (7.14)–(7.15), respectively. Thus, a VSC system that utilizes
maug-abc as the PWM modulating signal possesses the same control model as the one
that assumes mabc . However, with maug-abc the magnitude of − →              can be as
                                                               m , that is, m,
high as 1.15, and thus the VSC is able to produce an AC-side voltage of 1.15 times that
of the conventional PWM. Similarly, for a given AC-side voltage level, the VSC with
the third-harmonic injected PWM can employ a DC-bus voltage level of 13% lower.

7.3.6.2 Implementation To generate the PWM modulating signal for the third-
                                              are required based on (7.41)–(7.43).
order harmonic injection, values of ε(t) and m(t)
However, in the VSC system of Figure 7.3, the controllers provide mα and mβ , and
then mabc is generated based on the αβ- to abc-frame transformation. Therefore, it is
imperative to formulate maug-abc in terms of mabc , mα , and mβ .
   Consider that maug-a is given by (7.41). Using the identity cos 3ε = 4 cos3 ε −
3 cos ε, (7.41) can be rewritten as
                                  3          2
                   maug-a (t) =                 cos3 ε.
                                     cos ε − m(t)
                                    m(t)                                           (7.59)
                                  2          3

                                                                         2 (t), we obtain
                                                                 2 (t)/m
Multiplying the second term of the right-hand side of (7.59) by m
                                            -          .3
                              3                cos ε
                                          2 m(t)
                                 cos ε −
                  maug-a (t) = m(t)                       .                        (7.60)
                              2           3     2 (t)
                                               m

                                                          2 (t) = m2α + m2β , we
             cos ε between (7.38) and (7.60), and using m
Eliminating m(t)
conclude that

                                     3          2 m3a (t)
                      maug-a (t) =     ma (t) −             .                      (7.61)
                                     2          3 m2α + m2β

Similarly, maug-b and maug-c are derived as

                                     3          2 m3b (t)
                      maug-b (t) =     mb (t) −                                    (7.62)
                                     2          3 m2α + m2β

                                     3          2 m3c (t)
                      maug-c (t) =     mc (t) −             .                      (7.63)
                                     2          3 m2α + m2β


Figure 7.11 shows a block diagram of a signal transformer that receives mα and mβ ,
and generates maug-abc . Figure 7.12 shows a schematic diagram of a real-/reactive-
power controller that employs the third-harmonic injected PWM. The real-/reactive-
power controller of Figure 7.12 is the same as that of Figure 7.3, with the exception
that the mαβ -to-mabc block is now replaced by the block diagram of Figure 7.11. The
third-harmonic injected PWM is equally applicable to the two-level VSC (Fig. 6.19)
and the three-level NPC (Fig. 6.18). Therefore, for real-/reactive-power controllers
of Figures 7.3 and 7.12, the VSC can be either a two-level VSC or a three-level NPC.
                                        REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER             179




FIGURE 7.11 Block diagram of the αβ- to abc-frame signal transformer used for third-
harmonic injected PWM.

   As Figure 7.12 illustrates, for a VSC employing the third-harmonic injected PWM,
each component of maug-abc is limited to ±1. This is equivalent to |mabc | < 1 for a
VSC that employs the conventional PWM strategy. Thus, based on the third-harmonic




FIGURE 7.12 Schematic diagram of the real-/reactive-power controller adopting the third-
harmonic injected PWM.
180                    GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


injected PWM, the VSC AC-side voltage can be as high as ±1.15(VDC /2), instead of
±(VDC /2) under the conventional PWM. Equivalently, if the third-harmonic injected
PWM is employed, a lower DC-bus voltage can be adopted for the VSC, as the next
example illustrates.

          EXAMPLE 7.2               Third-Harmonic Injected PWM
          Consider the VSC system of Example 7.1 that adopts the third-harmonic in-
          jected PWM. The VSC system parameters are the same as those of Example 7.1,
          and the system is subjected to the same sequence of disturbances. However, the
          DC-bus voltage is chosen to be VDC = 1250 V in this example. Figure 7.13
          illustrates the behavior of the VSC system in response to a step change in Psref
          at t = 0.1372 s, from zero to 1.0 MW.
              A comparison between Figures 7.13(a) and 7.9 indicates that mabc in this
          case is larger than that in Example 7.1. In the VSC system of Example 7.1,
          following the disturbance, ma transiently reaches its maximum value of unity
          (Fig. 7.9) and is not permitted to increase further. However, under the third-
          harmonic injected PWM, ma can reach about 1.15 (Fig. 7.13(a)), while maug-a
          reaches unity (Fig. 7.13(b)); this is acceptable since under the third-harmonic
          injected PWM, maug-abc (and not mabc ) is constrained to ±1.


                      1.15
                                                                                      ma
 mabc




                         0                                                            mb
                                                                                      mc
                             (a)
                     −1.15
 Vtαβ (V) maug-abc




                         1                                                        maug-a
                         0                                                        maug-b
                                                                                  maug-c
                        −1 (b)
                       725
                       391                                                            Vtα
                         0                                                            Vtβ
                      −391 (c)
                                                                                      Vˆt

                      2000
 iα (A)




                                                                                    iαref
                         0                                                          iα
                     −2000 (d)

                      2000
 iβ (A)




                                                                                    iβref
                         0                                                           iβ
                     −2000 (e)
                         0.12      0.13   0.1372      0.15      0.16       0.17             0.18
                                                    time (s)
FIGURE 7.13 Dynamic response of the VSC system using third-harmonic injected PWM;
Example 7.2.
          REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER BASED ON THREE-LEVEL NPC                  181

      A comparison between Figures 7.13(c) and 7.9 reveals that the third-
   harmonic injected PWM generates the same AC-side voltage as that in
   Example 7.1. Figures 7.13(d) and (e) indicate that the VSC system with the
   third-harmonic injected PWM exhibits the same dynamic and steady-state be-
   havior as those shown in Figure 7.6 for the VSC system of Example 7.1. How-
   ever, the DC-bus voltage is 13% smaller than that in Example 7.1.


7.4 REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER BASED ON
THREE-LEVEL NPC

The real-/reactive-power controllers of Figures 7.3 and 7.12 can utilize a three-level
NPC instead of a two-level VSC. Thus, based on the uniﬁed dynamic model of
Section 6.7.4, the same procedures described for the two-level VSC can be applied to
the design of the α- and β-axis compensators of the VSC system. The only difference
is that the three-level NPC also requires a DC-side voltage equalizing scheme as
discussed in Section 6.7.2. The DC-side voltage equalizing scheme is designed based
on the block diagram of Figure 6.17, the three-level NPC parameters, and the operating
range. The design is, however, independent of the parameters of α- and β-axis current
controllers. In this section, the procedure for designing the DC-side voltage equalizing
scheme is presented.
    Assume that the three-level NPC of Figure 7.14 is used as the VSC for the real-
/reactive-power controller of Figure 7.3 or Figure 7.12. The control block diagram
of the DC-side voltage equalizing scheme is the same as that of Figure 6.17, which,
for ease of reference, is repeated here as Figure 7.15. Figure 7.15 indicates that the
control plant is an integrator with a variable gain of −i cos γ where, as discussed in
Chapter 6, i is the amplitude of the AC-side current and γ is the angle of the AC-side
terminal voltage minus that of the AC-side current, that is, the power-factor angle of
the VSC. Both i and γ are functions of the operating point of the three-level NPC and,
therefore, −i cos γ can assume different (positive or negative) values. Consequently,
a ﬁxed-structure compensator, although stable for a speciﬁc operating point, may
be unstable at another operating point. To make the loop gain independent of the
operating point, the compensator output can be divided by −i cos γ (Fig. 7.15). Since
the converter system is controlled in αβ-frame, it is preferred to express the gain
−i cos γ in terms of the αβ-frame variables.
    The modulating waveforms of the three-level NPC are


                                      1
                                          cos [3ε(t)],
                         cos [ε(t)] − m(t)
          ma (t) = m0 + m(t)                                                     (7.64)
                                      6
                                         
                                      2π     1
                         cos ε(t) −
          mb (t) = m0 + m(t)                    cos [3ε(t)],
                                            − m(t)                               (7.65)
                                       3     6
                                         
                                      4π     1
                         cos ε(t) −
          mc (t) = m0 + m(t)                    cos [3ε(t)].
                                            − m(t)                               (7.66)
                                       3     6
182    GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


                                       is                   ip


                                            2C                               V1
                                                                                                         Vta ia
                                                            inp                     Three-level NPC      Vtb ib
 Effective capacitance: C        V DC             0                                    Figure 6.6
                                                                                                         Vtc ic
                                                                             V2
                                            2C

                                                            in

                                                                                        4 4 4
                                                                                        PWM generator
                                                                                         3x Figure 6.3




                                                      DC-side voltage balancer    m0
                                                            Figure 6.17




                                                                                         mamb mc
                   FIGURE 7.14 Block diagram of the three-level NPC.


   These are the same modulating signals (6.46)–(6.48) that are augmented with the
third-harmonic component. Based on (7.37), the AC-side terminal voltages are

                     VDC        VDC             1     VDC
      Vta (t) = m0         
                         + m(t)                   
                                    cos [ε(t)] − m(t)     cos [3ε(t)],                                     (7.67)
                      2          2              6      2


                                                            − iˆ cos γ
       Partial DC-side voltage equalizer                          Partial DC-side voltage dynamics
              Compensator            Saturation
          e             u                             m0                 6       inp0    1
 0
         –
                K(s)                                              x
                                                                         π              2Cs


                        − iˆ cos γ                    LPF

                                                  F(s)


                                                                                         2Vˆr3sin(3ω t + ζ )

FIGURE 7.15 Control block diagram of the DC-side voltage equalizing scheme for the
three-level NPC of Figure 7.14.
          REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER BASED ON THREE-LEVEL NPC                   183

                                           
               VDC        VDC            2π    1     VDC
  Vtb (t) = m0       
                   + m(t)     cos ε(t) −         
                                              − m(t)     cos [3ε(t)],             (7.68)
                2          2              3    6      2
                                           
               VDC        VDC            4π    1     VDC
  Vtc (t) = m0       
                   + m(t)     cos ε(t) −         
                                              − m(t)     cos [3ε(t)].             (7.69)
                2          2              3    6      2

Based on (4.2), the space-phasor equivalent of (7.67)–(7.69) is

                                →
                                −              VDC jε(t)
                                          
                                V t (t) = m(t)    e .                             (7.70)
                                                2

Based on (6.35)–(6.37), the converter AC-side currents are
                                       -           .
                        ia (t) = i cos ε(t) − γ(t) ,                             (7.71)
                                                        
                                                     2π
                        ib (t) = i cos ε(t) − γ(t) −       ,                      (7.72)
                                                       3
                                                        
                                                      4π
                        ic (t) = i cos ε(t) − γ(t) −     ,                       (7.73)
                                                       3

which correspond to the space phasor

                                →
                                −
                                 i (t) = i(t)ejε(t) e−jγ(t) .                    (7.74)

Based on (4.38), the instantaneous real power leaving the converter AC-side terminals
is
                        !                    "               #       $
                            3−→      →
                                     −               3
          Pt (t) = Re         v t (t) i ∗ (t)    =          i cos γ .
                                                       VDC m                      (7.75)
                            2                        4

                                           we deduce
Dividing both sides of (7.75) by (3/4)VDC m,
                                                 
                        i cos γ =          4
                                                      Pt (t).                     (7.76)
                                              
                                         3VDC m

If the instantaneous power exchanged with the interface reactors is neglected, then
Pt (t) ≈ Ps (t) and (7.76) can be written as
                                                 
                        i cos γ ≈          4
                                                      Ps (t).                     (7.77)
                                              
                                         3VDC m

Equation (7.77) indicates that since VDC and m are always positive, the sign of i cos γ
is the same as that of Ps (t). In addition, VDC is often regulated at a fairly constant
            typically changes over a fairly narrow range, for example, from 0.7
value, and m
184       GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME




FIGURE 7.16 Modiﬁed control block diagram of the partial DC-side voltage equalizing
scheme for the three-level NPC of Figure 7.14.



to 1.0.2 Thus, i cos γ is approximately proportional to Ps (t). Based on (7.77), the loop
gain of the DC-side voltage equalizing system of Figure 7.15 is mainly a function
of the real-power exchange between the three-level NPC and the AC system, and
assumes opposite signs under inverting (Ps (t) ≥ 0) and rectifying (Ps (t) ≤ 0) modes
of operation.
   Figure 7.16 shows the control block diagram of Figure 7.15 in which the vari-
able gain −i cos γ in the plant model has been replaced by its equivalent expression
in terms of Ps , based on (7.77). However, only the sign of Ps is compensated in
the control loop. Thus, the magnitude of the loop gain is proportional to the ab-
solute value of Ps , while its sign always remains positive irrespective of the sign
of Ps .
   For the control loop of Figure 7.16, Ps can be considered as the disturbance input.
In the steady state, this disturbance does not impact the output, that is, V1 − V2 0 ,
even if K(s) is a pure gain; the reason is that the control plant includes an integral
term. The (compensator) gain can be selected for the converter-rated real power.
Thus, the loop gain and as a result the bandwidth of the closed-loop system drop as
Ps decreases. However, this is not an issue for the DC-side voltage equalizing system
as the reference command, that is, the desired difference between the voltages of the
two DC-side capacitors is normally set to zero and not changed.
   As explained in Section 6.7.2, V1 − V2 includes a dominant third-harmonic com-
ponent that must be attenuated by the ﬁlter F (s). This is possible if a pair of
complex-conjugate zeros at s = ±j(3ω0 ) is assigned to F (s). Then, implementa-
tion considerations require F (s) to have at least two poles,3 that is, F (s) should

2 As we saw in Section 7.3.4, m  (t), under steady-state conditions, is a function of the reactive power, but
indicates large excursions from its steady-state value if the real power quickly changes.
3 This renders F (s) as a notch ﬁlter with stop frequency of 3ω .
                                                                 0
             REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER BASED ON THREE-LEVEL NPC                              185

be a proper transfer function.4 The following example demonstrates the design
procedure.

   EXAMPLE 7.3               Real-/Reactive-Power Controller Based on the Three-
   level NPC
   Consider the VSC system of Figure 7.12 that utilizes the three-level NPC of
   Figure 7.14 and adopts the third-harmonic injected PWM strategy. The system
   parameters and controllers are the same as those in Example 7.1, except that
   2C = 19250 ␮F, ron = 0.44 m, and VDC = 1.25 kV. The rated power of the
   system of Figure 7.12 is Ps = 1.0 MW. Based on m  = 2Vt /VDC and assuming
   t ≈ V
   V     s = 0.391 kV, we obtain m ≈ 0.63. Thus, the plant transfer function, in
   the closed-loop system of Figure 7.16, is
                                          
                                    4          1   168
                    G(s) =                       =           [(kA)−1 ].
                                       
                                 πCVDC m       s    s

   Let F (s) be

                             s2 + (3ω0 )2       s2 + 11312
                   F (s) =                =                    ,
                              (s + 3ω0 )2   s2 + 2262s + 11312

   where ω0 = 377 rad/s. Then, (i) the third-harmonic component of V1 − V2 is
   suppressed, (ii) F (s) has a unity DC gain, and (iii) the loop gain continues to roll
   off for frequencies beyond 3ω0 . If a pure gain is considered for the compensator,
   that is, K(s) = k, and |Ps | = 1 MW, then the loop gain is

                                                s2 + 11312
         (s) = K(s)G(s)F (s)|Ps | = (168k) 0 2                1.
                                           s s + 2262s + 11312

   For ω ≤ ω0 /10, the phase of (jω) is almost constant at −90◦ , corresponding
   to a phase margin of 90◦ . For ω larger than ω0 /10, due to the double real pole
   at ω = ω0 , the phase drops with a slope of approximately −90◦ /dec. Thus, if
   we need a phase margin of, for example, 70◦ , we should select the loop gain
   crossover frequency, that is, ωc , to be about 1.93 decade larger than ω0 /10,
   that is, ωc = 218 rad/s. Substituting for ωc = 218 rad/s in equation |(jωc )| =
   1, we ﬁnd k = 1.40 (kV)−1 , for which the exact phase margin is 68◦ , and
   the closed-loop poles are located at s = −1910 rad/s and s = −294 ± j267
   rad/s. Figure 7.17 shows the frequency responses of the loop gain and closed-
   loop transfer function. It is observed that the bandwidth of the closed-loop
   system is about ωb = 400 rad/s. The closed-loop transfer function is Gcl (s) =
   |Ps |K(s)G(s)/(1 + (s)).

4 By deﬁnition, a proper transfer function is one whose denominator has a degree equal to or higher than

that of its numerator.
186     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME




FIGURE 7.17 Open-loop and closed-loop frequency responses of the partial DC-side voltage
balancer of Figure 7.16.



      Figures 7.18 and 7.19 illustrate the dynamic behavior of the real-/reactive-
   power controller in response to step changes in real- and reactive-power com-
   mands. Based on the uniﬁed model of the VSC, presented in Section 6.7.4, we
   anticipate no differences between the dynamic responses of the real-/reactive-
   power controller of this example (using a three-level NPC) and that of Example
   7.1 (utilizing a two-level VSC). A comparison of Figures 7.18 and 7.5 conﬁrms
   this. Figures 7.19(a)–(c) show the modulating signals, that is, mabc , the DC
   offset added to the modulating signals to equalize the partial DC-side voltages,
   that is, m0 , and the third-harmonic injected modulating signals, that is, maug-abc .
   Figure 7.19(b) shows that during transients m0 is changed by the closed-
   loop controller of Figure 7.16 to maintain the DC-side voltages V1 and V2 .
                      REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER BASED ON THREE-LEVEL NPC                             187

     Ps (kW)          2000
                      1000
                         0
                     −1000
                     −2000
     Qs (kVAr)




                      1000
                       500
                         0
                      −500
                     −1000
     Vsa and ia




                      5000
                                     10Vsa
                            0        ia
                     −5000
                         0.05                0.1   0.1372              0.2          0.25             0.3
                                                            time (s)

FIGURE 7.18 Dynamic responses of real and reactive power for the three-level NPC of
Example 7.3. Compare the results with Figure 7.5 of Example 7.1.


   Figure 7.19(d) illustrates that V1 and V2 preserve their equal DC components
   during the transients, but their third-harmonic components change according to
   the operating condition. As explained in Chapter 6, the third-harmonic compo-
   nent of the midpoint current of the three-level NPC increases as the converter


                        1 (a)                                                                  ma
                                                                                               mb
     mabc




                        0                                                                      mc
                       −1


                     0.02 (b)
     m0




                        0
                 −0.02


                        1 (c)                                                              maug-a
     maug-abc




                                                                                           maug-b
                        0                                                                  maug-c
                       −1
     V1 and V2 (V)




                     650 (d)                                                                    V1
                     625                                                                        V2
                     600
                            0.1372                     0.2                   0.25                    0.3
                                                        time (s)

FIGURE 7.19 Modulating signals, voltage equalizing corrective offset, and the partial DC-
side voltages of the converter system of Example 7.3.
188    GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


   power factor decreases. Thus, as Figure 7.19(d) illustrates, the (third-harmonic)
   ripples of V1 and V2 increase after t = 0.25 s when the three-level NPC starts
   to supply reactive power.


7.4.1 Midpoint Current of Three-level NPC Based on Third-Harmonic
Injected PWM
Section 6.6.3 formulated the midpoint current of the three-level NPC and con-
cluded that based on the conventional PWM strategy, the midpoint current can be
approximated by the following third-harmonic component:
                #        $/
                      i
       inp (t) ≈ 0.764m    1 − 0.555 cos2γ · cos (3ε + ζ),                      (7.78)


where γ is the power-factor angle of the three-level NPC and ζ = π −
tan−1 (1.5 tan γ). Then, based on (7.78), it was shown that the peak of the third
harmonic of the midpoint current resides within the following range:

                          i ≤ inp ≤ 0.76m
                      0.51m                i,                                 (7.79)

where the lower bound corresponds to unity power factor, whereas the upper
bound corresponds to zero power factor. Adopting the third-harmonic injected PWM
strategy, the midpoint current of the three-level NPC can be expressed as
               #        $/
                     i
      inp (t) ≈ 0.709m    1 − 0.934 cos2γ · cos (3ε + ζ) ,                      (7.80)

where γ is the power-factor angle of the converter and ζ = tan−1 (3.9 tan γ). Equa-
tion (7.80) is derived by substituting for ma from (7.64) in (6.31) and following the
procedures detailed in Section 6.6.3. As (7.80) indicates, based on the third-harmonic
injected PWM strategy, the amplitude of the midpoint current is subject to

                          i ≤ inp ≤ 0.71m
                      0.18m                i,                                 (7.81)

where, similar to (7.79), the lower bound corresponds to unity power factor and the
upper bound corresponds to zero power factor. A comparison between (7.81) and
(7.79) indicates that if the three-level NPC operates at a high power factor, that is,
the converter is mainly a real-power processor, the amplitude of the midpoint current
and the third-harmonic ripples of the partial DC-side voltages are considerably lower
when the third-harmonic injected PWM is used. This can be regarded as another
advantage of the third-harmonic injected PWM strategy for the three-level NPC. As
the power factor of the converter decreases, the reduction in the midpoint current
under the third-harmonic injected PWM strategy becomes less signiﬁcant.
   Figure 7.20 compares the third-harmonic voltage ripples of DC-side voltages of
the three-level NPC of Example 7.3 under the conventional and the third-harmonic
                                                     CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT             189

                 780
 V1 and V2 (V)


                       (a) conventional PWM                                                     V1
                 760                                                                            V2

                 740

                 720


                 780
 V1 and V2 (V)




                       (b) third-harmonic injected PWM                                          V1
                                                                                                V2
                 755
                 745


                 720
                        0.14      0.16     0.18      0.2       0.22   0.24   0.26       0.28
                                                           time (s)

FIGURE 7.20 Third-harmonic ripples on the partial DC-side voltages of the three-level NPC
using (a) conventional PWM and (b) third-harmonic injected PWM.



injected PWM strategies, when the net DC-bus voltage is 1500 V. Figure 7.20
illustrates that the magnitude of ripples is reduced to about half when the third-
harmonic injected PWM strategy is utilized.
    It should be noted that the use of the third-harmonic injected PWM has been pro-
posed in the technical literature as a means to eliminate the third-harmonic component
of the midpoint current and, therefore, those of the DC capacitor voltages [71]. As de-
scribed in Ref. [71], to eliminate the third harmonic of the midpoint current, the PWM
modulating signals must be augmented with a third-harmonic component whose am-
plitude and phase angle are functions of γ; for any γ, the amplitude and the phase
angle can be obtained from a look-up table [71]. Since the augmented modulating
signals do not have the form described by (7.41)–(7.43), the PWM strategy proposed
in Ref. [71] does not result in the maximum DC-to-AC voltage gain for the VSC.5
The method of Ref. [71] is primarily intended to mitigate the third-harmonic voltage
ripple, the associated stress imposed on the DC-side capacitors, and the low-order
AC-side voltage harmonics generated as a result of the ripple.


7.5               CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT

The objective of the real-/reactive-power controller, as discussed with respect to the
conﬁguration of Figures 7.3 and 7.12, is to control the real and reactive power that the
VSC system exchanges with the AC system. In the real-/reactive-power controller,
the VSC DC side is connected to an ideal DC voltage source that dictates the DC-bus

5 As discussed in Section 7.3.6, the DC-to-AC voltage gain is V
                                                                DC /2 for conventional PWM strategy and
1.15VDC /2 for third-harmonic injected PWM.
190     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME




       FIGURE 7.21 Schematic diagram of the controlled DC-voltage power port.




voltage. Thus, the VSC system acts as a bidirectional power-ﬂow path between the
AC system and the DC voltage source. However, in many applications, for example,
photovoltaic (PV) systems and fuel-cell systems. The VSC DC side is not interfaced
with a voltage source; rather, it is connected to a (DC) power source that needs to be
interfaced and exchange (real) power with the AC system. Thus, the DC-bus voltage
is not imposed and, therefore, needs to be regulated. This scenario is illustrated in
Figure 7.21.
   The VSC system of Figure 7.21 is conceptually the same as that of Figure 7.12,
except that the DC voltage source is replaced by a (variable) DC power source. The
power source typically represents a power-electronic unit (or a cluster of units) with
the prime source of energy behind it, for example, a PV array, a variable-speed wind
turbine-generator set, a fuel-cell unit, and a gas turbine-generator set. We consider it as
a black box and assume that it exchanges a time-varying power Pext (t) with the VSC
DC side. Thus, the VSC system of Figure 7.21 enables a bidirectional power exchange
between the power source (black box) and the AC system. Hereinafter, we refer to the
VSC system of Figure 7.21 as the controlled DC-voltage power port. The controlled
DC-voltage power port is employed as an integral part of the STATCOM, the back-
to-back HVDC converter system, and variable-speed wind-power units; these are
discussed in Chapters 11, 12, and 13, respectively.
                                        CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT                 191

7.5.1   Model of Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port
Since there is no DC voltage source in the VSC system of Figure 7.21, any power
imbalance within the outlined area of Figure 7.21 results in excursions (and poten-
tially instability) of the DC-bus voltage, VDC . Thus, the controlled DC-voltage power
port of Figure 7.21 requires that VDC be regulated. Normally, Pext (t) is an exoge-
nous signal that cannot be controlled by the VSC system. Therefore, to ensure the
balance of power, PDC must be controlled via the VSC system. In the VSC system of
Figure 7.21, the power balance is formulated as
                                               
                              d        1
               Pext − Ploss −            CV 2       = PDC ,                            (7.82)
                              dt       2 DC

where Ploss = VDC iloss , PDC = VDC iDC , and the third term at the left-hand side of
(7.82) corresponds to the rate of change in the energy of the DC-bus capacitor. It
should be noted that, based on the uniﬁed dynamic model of Section 6.7.4, (7.82)
is valid for both the two-level VSC and the three-level NPC. However, the effective
capacitor of the DC bus for a three-level NPC is half each of its DC-side capacitors.
Substituting for PDC = Pt and rearranging the resultant, we deduce

                    2
                  C dVDC
                         = Pext − Ploss − Pt ,                                         (7.83)
                  2  dt

where Pt is the VSC AC-side terminal power. Equation (7.83) represents a dynamic
system in which VDC 2 is the state variable and the output, P is the control input, and
                                                              t
Pext and Ploss are the disturbance inputs.
   Since the VSC system of Figure 7.21 enables to control Ps and Qs , we express the
control input Pt in terms of Ps and Qs . Thus, by multiplying both sides of (7.11) with
      →
      −              →−
                     −  →
(3/2) i ∗ , equating i i ∗ to i2 , and applying the real-part operator to both sides of
the resultant, we obtain
                       −
                        →
              3L           →∗
                       d i −
                 Re         i
               2        dt
                                           !               "          !          "
                   3                            3−→−→                     3−→−→∗
                = − (R + ron )i2 + Re            Vt i ∗       − Re         Vs i   .   (7.84)
                   2                            2                         2

Based on (4.38), the second and third terms of the right-hand side of (7.84) are,
respectively, equal to Pt and Ps . Thus,
                    −
                     →
           3L           →∗
                    d i −          3
              Re         i      = − (R + ron )i2 + Pt − Ps .                          (7.85)
            2        dt            2
192     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


Equation (7.85) can be solved for Pt as
                                                       −
                                                        →
                     3                3L                   →∗
                                                       d i −
            Pt = Ps + (R + ron )i2 +    Re                 i .                 (7.86)
                     2                 2                dt

                                                −→→ 
                                                 d i −  ∗ is the instantaneous power
As shown in Example 4.5, the term 3L
                                   2 Re           dt i
absorbed by the three-phase inductor bank L (see (4.41)) and 23 (R + ron )i2 is the
power dissipated by the resistance of the three-phase inductor.
   Practically, (R + ron ) is a small resistance and its associated power is negligible
compared to Pt and Ps . However, the power absorbed by the three-phase inductor can
be signiﬁcant during transients. The reason is that, since in a high-power VSC the
switching frequency is limited by power loss considerations, L must be adequately
large to suppress the switching harmonics. Furthermore, since the αβ-frame current
                     →
                     −
controllers are fast, i can undergo rapid phase and amplitude changes, during the
                                                                      →
                                                                      −
real-/reactive-power command tracking process. Substituting for i = iα + jiβ in
(4.41), we obtain
                   −
                    →
          3L       d i −
                       →∗            3L d # 2      $ 3L di2
             Re         i        =         iα + i2β =        .                  (7.87)
           2        dt                4 dt            4 dt

Based on (4.40), we deduce

                                         3−→− →
                         Ps + jQs =        V s i ∗.                             (7.88)
                                         2

Applying the complex-conjugate operator to (7.88) and multiplying the resultant by
(7.88), we deduce

                                            9  22
                          Ps2 + Q2s =         V i .                             (7.89)
                                            4 s

                                                              s is constant, we obtain
Substituting for i2 from (7.89) in (7.87), and assuming that V
                 −
                  →
        3L           →∗
                 d i −                L       dPs2       L       dQ2s
           Re         i      =                     +                  .         (7.90)
         2        dt                  s2
                                     3V        dt        s2
                                                        3V        dt

Thus, (7.86) can be rewritten as

                          2L            dPs      2L           dQs
            Pt ≈ Ps +              Ps       +            Qs       .             (7.91)
                           s2
                          3V             dt       s2
                                                 3V            dt
                                         CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT                193

Substituting for Pt from (7.91) in (7.83), we have
                                        %                                   &
                 2
               dVDC  2        2       2                      2LPs     dPs
                    = Pext − Ploss −       Ps +
                dt   C       C       C                        s2
                                                             3V        dt
                         %              &
                       2    2LQs dQs
                     +                   .                                            (7.92)
                       C     3Vs2  dt

Equation (7.92) describes dynamics of VDC     2 . Based on (7.92), V 2 is the output, P is
                                                                      DC                  s
the control input, and Pext , Ploss , and Qs are the disturbance inputs. Thus, to control
  2 , one can form the control scheme shown in Figure 7.22, which consists of an
VDC
inner control loop nested inside an outer loop. The outer loop compares VDC           2 with
                   2
the reference VDCref , processes the error by a compensator, and delivers Psref to
the inner control loop. The inner control loop is the real-power controller detailed in
Section 7.3, which regulates Ps at its reference, Psref .
    In the system of Figure 7.22, Qs can be independently controlled. If the command
Qsref is set to zero, the VSC system operates at unity power factor. However, Qsref
may be set to a positive or a negative value, depending on the required level of the
reactive-power exchange with the AC system; this is the operational strategy of a
STATCOM. If the AC system has a signiﬁcant equivalent impedance, the voltage at
the PCC is subject to variations depending on the load changes and/or level of the
real-power exchange. In this case, the PCC voltage can be regulated by controlling
Qs , via a closed-loop system that monitors the PCC voltage and determines Qsref .
The STATCOM mode of operation and the AC voltage regulation strategy through
reactive-power control are discussed in Chapter 11.
    Figure 7.22 illustrates that an estimate of Pext can be added as a feed-forward signal
to the output of the compensator Kv (s). Thus, a change in Pext is rapidly reﬂected in
                            2 is mitigated. Such an estimate of P
Psref , and its impact on VDC                                        ext is available in many
applications. For example, if the power source connected to the VSC system of Figure
7.22 is another VSC system that controls an electric machine, Pext is approximately
equal to the product of the machine torque and speed, ignoring the power losses of the
machine and VSC. Figure 7.22 also shows that the compensator output, augmented
by the measure of Pext , is passed through a saturation block before the real-power
controller. This ensures that the VSC is protected from overcurrent conditions in case
the DC-bus voltage is subjected to a signiﬁcant deviation from its reference value, or
in case there is a large excursion in Pext (t).
    In the VSC system of Figure 7.22, the compensator Kv (s) is designed according to
(7.92), which indicates that Pext and Ploss impact VDC  2 under both transient and steady-

state conditions. The impact of Pext is, to a great extent, mitigated by the feed-forward
compensation. However, Ploss cannot be measured or estimated with certainty to be
compensated by the feed-forward compensation. Therefore, to eliminate the steady-
state error of VDC2 due to P
                              loss , Kv (s) must include an integral term. Since the control
plant also includes an integral term, to ensure stability and an adequate phase margin,
Kv (s) must also include a zero.
194     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME




FIGURE 7.22 Schematic diagram of the controlled DC-voltage power port with DC-bus
voltage regulator.


                                                 dQs
   Due to the presence of terms Ps dP  s
                                     dt and Qs dt , the control plant described by
(7.92) is nonlinear. Thus, to design Kv (s), we ﬁrst linearize (7.92) about a steady-
state operating point, which is computed by replacing all the derivatives in (7.92) by
zero. Thus,

                    Ps0 = Pext0 − Ploss ≈ Pext0 ,                              (7.93)

and (7.92) is linearized as
                                    %                              &
                      2
                   d VDC  2       2           2LPs0         d Ps
                         = Pext −     Ps +
                     dt   C       C             s2
                                               3V            dt
                              %                &
                            2    2LQs0 d Qs
                          +                     ,                              (7.94)
                            C      s2
                                  3V       dt
                                                       CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT                      195

where the symbol ∼ denotes small-signal perturbations. Transformation of (7.94) into
                                                          2 as
Laplace domain results in a transfer function from Ps to VDC
                                                            
                                                            2 τs + 1
                       Gv (s) = VDC
                                 2
                                    (s)/Ps (s) = −                  ,                                      (7.95)
                                                            C    s

where the time constant τ is

                                        2LPs0   2LPext0
                                τ=            =         .                                                  (7.96)
                                          s2
                                         3V       s2
                                                 3V

Equation (7.96) indicates that τ is proportional to the (steady-state) real-power ﬂow
Pext0 (or Ps0 ). Equation (7.96) suggests that if Pext0 is small, τ is insigniﬁcant and the
plant is predominantly an integrator. As Pext increases, τ becomes larger and brings
about a shift in the phase of Gv (s). In the inverting mode of operation where Pext0
is positive, τ is positive and adds to the phase of Gv (s). However, in the rectifying
mode of operation, that is, when Pext0 is negative, τ is negative and reduces the phase
of Gv (s); a larger absolute value of Pext0 results in a smaller phase of Gv (s). Based
on (7.95), the plant zero is z = −1/τ. Therefore, a negative τ corresponds to a zero
on the right-half plane (RHP), and the controlled DC-voltage power port represents
a nonminimum-phase system in the rectifying mode of operation [72]. The phase
reduction, associated with the nonminimum-phase zero, has a detrimental impact on
the closed-loop stability, as discussed in Section 7.5.3.


7.5.2     DC-Bus Voltage Control in Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port
Figure 7.23 shows a block diagram of the DC-bus voltage control scheme for the
controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 7.22. The control scheme is composed
of Kv (s), the real-power controller Gp (s), and the control plant Gv (s) described by
(7.95). As Figures 7.22 and 7.23 indicate, Kv (s) is multiplied by −1 to compensate
for the negative sign of Gv (s). Thus, the loop gain is

                                  (s) = −Kv (s)Gp (s)Gv (s).                                              (7.97)



        DC-bus voltage controller                          Composite control plant
                                                       Power controller          DC-bus voltage dynamics
                          Compensator                    dynamics
                e˜ V                         P˜ sref                      P˜ s         2 τs + 1
 0
            –
                         − KV (s)                         GP (s)                  −
                                                                                       C    s
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                           V˜ DC



FIGURE 7.23 Control block diagram of the DC-bus voltage regulation loop based on the
linearized model.
196     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


   Let Kv (s) be
                                      
                                      C H(s)
                            Kv (s) =         ,                                     (7.98)
                                      2  s

where H(s) is a proper transfer fraction with no zero at s = 0. Substituting in (7.97)
for Kv (s) and Gv (s), respectively, from (7.98) and (7.95), we obtain

                                              τs + 1
                          (s) = Gp (s)H(s)          .                             (7.99)
                                                s2

The objective is to select H(s) such that (jω) crosses the 0 dB axis with the
slope of about −20 dB/dec at ω = ωc , and the phase of (jωc ) is larger than
−180◦ by a reasonable phase margin. This must be achieved with respect to the
facts that (i) Gp (jω) has a negative phase at high frequencies that can reduce the
phase margin, and (ii) depending on the level of the real power, τ assumes different
values.
   To ensure that the phase delay due to Gp (jωc ) is negligible, ωc should be chosen
adequately lower than the bandwidth of Gp (jω), such that Gp (jωc ) ≈ 1 + j0. Thus,
ωc is selected to be about 0.1–0.5 times the bandwidth of Gp (jω). This should not
be considered as a major limitation on the DC-bus voltage controller. The reason is
that a very fast DC-bus voltage controller is often neither necessary nor even desired;
in a high-power VSC system, particularly if a three-level NPC is used, the DC-bus
capacitor is typically large and consequently the DC-bus voltage cannot be rapidly
changed.
   Assuming Gp (jωc ) ≈ 1, (7.99) is rewritten as

                                             jτωc + 1
                         (jωc ) ≈ H(jωc )            .                           (7.100)
                                               −ωc2

H(jωc ) is then selected to ensure that (i) |(jωc )| = 1 and (ii) ∠(jωc ) is larger than
−180◦ by a certain phase margin. The next example details the design process.


   EXAMPLE 7.4          Design of the DC-Bus Voltage Controller
   Consider the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 7.22. The system pa-
   rameters and all controllers are the same as those in Example 7.1, and C = 9625
   ␮F. The rated power of the converter system is Ps = ±1 MW. Therefore, based
   on (7.96), τ can vary from −0.43 to 0.43 ms. As in Example 7.1, ωb = 3820
   rad/s for the αβ-axis controllers. Thus, we select the gain crossover frequency
   of the DC-bus voltage control loop to be ωc = 700 rad/s.
      Let us ﬁrst adjust the gain of H(s) to achieve |(jωc )| = 1. Based on (7.100),
   and since (τωc )2  1, if H(jω) is a pure gain equal to ωc2 , then the loop gain
   is unity at ω = ωc . This is shown in the plots of Figure 7.24 (solid lines) as
   the uncompensated case. The Bode plots of Figure 7.24 correspond to the
   positive rated real-power, the zero real-power, and the negative rated real-power
                                                          CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT          197


                   100
 Magnitude (dB)


                              Positive rated real power                             uncompensated
                    50                                                              compensated
                     0
                   −50
                  −100


                     0
                              Positive rated real power                             uncompensated
                   –30
 Phase (deg)




                   –60                                                              compensated
                   –90
                  –120
                  –150
                  –180
                        101                  102               103            104               105
                                                             w (rad/s)

                   100
 Magnitude (dB)




                              Zero real power                                       uncompensated
                    50                                                              compensated
                    0
                   −50
                  −100



                   –90        Zero real power                                       uncompensated
 Phase (deg)




                                                                                    compensated
                  –120
                  –150
                  –180

                        101                  102                103           104                   105
                                                              w (rad/s)

                   100 Negative rated real power
Magnitude (dB)




                                                                                    uncompensated
                    50                                                              compensated
                    0
                   −50
                  −100


                  –120 Negative rated real power
                                                                                    uncompensated
Phase (deg)




                  –150
                                                                                    compensated
                  –180
                  –210
                  –240
                  –270
                     101                    102                103            104               105
                                                              w (rad/s)

FIGURE 7.24 Bode plot of the loop gain for the DC-bus voltage controller of Example 7.4.
198    GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


  operating points. The three operating points correspond to τ = 0.43 ms, τ = 0,
  and τ = −0.43 ms, respectively.
      Figure 7.24 illustrates that the magnitude plot is similar for all three operating
  points and |(j700)| = 1. Moreover, the closed-loop system is stable for the
  positive rated real power, with a phase margin of about 18◦ . However, the loop
  is unstable under the zero-power and the negative rated power operating points,
  as ∠(j700) is correspondingly equal to 180◦ and −197◦ . Based on parameters
  of this speciﬁc example, the closed-loop system is stable, although poorly, for
  the positive rated power; however, it becomes unstable as the power becomes
  increasingly negative [72].
      To design the compensator, let us consider the worst-case scenario that corre-
  sponds to the negative rated real-power operating point, for which ∠(j700) ≈
  −197◦ . Thus, if a phase margin of, for example, 45◦ is required, 62◦ must be
  added to ∠(j700). This can be achieved by means of a lead ﬁlter, as explained
  in Example 3.6. Let H(s) be the lead ﬁlter

                                      s + (p1 /α)
                           H(s) = h               ,                                (7.101)
                                        s + p1

  where p1 is the ﬁlter pole and α > 1 is a real constant. The maximum phase of
  the lead ﬁlter is
                                              
                                   −1 α − 1
                          δm = sin               ,                        (7.102)
                                        α+1

  which corresponds to the frequency
                                      p1
                                 ωm = √ .                                          (7.103)
                                       α

  In our example, δm = 62◦ and ωm = ωc = 700 rad/s. Hence, based on
  (7.102) and (7.103), we obtain α = 16.1 and p1 = 2808 rad/s, and (7.101)
  becomes

                                       s + 174.4
                            H(s) = h             .                                 (7.104)
                                       s + 2808

  Solving for h based on |H(j700)| = ωc2 , one ﬁnds h = 1,965,666 s−2 . Substi-
  tuting for H(s) from (7.104) in (7.98), one concludes

                                     s + 174.4
                   Kv (s) = 9459                      [−1 ].                      (7.105)
                                   s (s + 2808)

     Dashed lines in Figure 7.24 illustrate the Bode plots of the compensated
  loop gain. Figure 7.24 shows that for all the three operating points, the
  magnitude of (jω) remains similar to that of the uncompensated loop, and
                                        CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT               199
 Ps (kW)
            2000 (a)
            1000
               0
           −1000
           −2000
    Qs (kVAr)




                 500 (b)
                   0
                –500


                1500
    V DC (V)




                1250 (c)
                1000                                                          VDCref
                 660
                                                                              VDC
                   0.05    0.1     0.1372               0.2           0.25             0.3
                                             time (s)
FIGURE 7.25 Behavior of the DC-bus voltage of the controlled DC-voltage power port, in
response to changes in Ps and Qs , without feed-forward compensation; Example 7.4.




    |(j700)| = 1. Moreover, the phase characteristic of the loop gain is improved
    such that ∠(j700) is equal to −101◦ , −117◦ , and −135◦ , respectively, for the
    positive rated power, zero-power, and negative rated power operating points.
    This, in turn, corresponds to phase margins of 79◦ , 63◦ , and 45◦ , respectively.
       Figure 7.25 illustrates the time response of the controlled DC-voltage power
    port of Figure 7.22 when the feed-forward compensation is disabled in the
    DC-bus voltage control loop. In addition, initially the DC power source is
    inactive, that is, Pext = 0, the VSC gating pulses are blocked, and the controllers
    are inactive. However, the AC system (source) is interfaced with three-phase
    reactors of the VSC through three 0.5  resistors, one in series with each
    inductor. Thus, the DC-bus capacitor is gradually charged to about 660 V via
    the antiparallel diodes of VSC switch cells (Fig. 7.25(c)). At t = 0.1 s, the
    three (0.5 ) start-up resistors are bypassed, the gating pulses are unblocked,
    and the controllers are activated. To limit the charging current of the DC-bus
    capacitor and also to avoid large overshoots or ringings in VDC , from t = 0.1
    s on, VDCref is changed from 660 V to the nominal value of 1250 V at the
    rate of 50 V/ms, as Figure 7.25(c) illustrates. To track VDCref , the DC-bus
    voltage controller forces Ps to become negative, as Figure 7.25(a) indicates.
    Figures 7.25(c) and (a) illustrate that before about t = 0.135, VDC is settled at
    VDCref and Ps assumes a small value corresponding to Ploss .
       At t = 0.1372 s, Pext of the DC power source is changed stepwise from
    zero to 1.0 MW. This results in an overshoot in VDC , as Figure 7.25(c) shows.
    However, the DC-bus voltage controller increases Ps to maintain the balance of
    power (Fig. 7.25(a)). At t = 0.2 s, Pext is step changed from 1.0 to −1.0 MW.
    Thus, the DC-bus voltage controller reduces Ps from about 1.0 to about −1.0
200              GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME
 Ps (kW)
            2000 (a)
            1000
               0
           −1000
           −2000
    Qs (kVAr)




                 500 (b)
                   0
                –500


                1500
    V DC (V)




                1250 (c)
                1000                                                          VDCref
                                                                              VDC
                 660
                   0.05        0.1    0.1372                0.2       0.25             0.3
                                                 time (s)
FIGURE 7.26 Behavior of the DC-bus voltage of the controlled DC-voltage power port, in
response to changes in Ps and Qs , with feed-forward compensation; Example 7.4.




    MW (Fig. 7.25(a)), and VDC is regulated at VDCref following an undershoot
    as shown in Figure 7.25(c). At t = 0.25 s, Qsref assumes a step change from
    zero to 500 kVAr (Fig. 7.25(b)). The disturbance, however, has an insigniﬁcant
    impact on VDC , as Figure 7.25(c) illustrates. The reason is that, based on (7.92),
    the contribution of Qs in dVDC2 /dt is weighted by the term 2L/(3V     s2 ), which
    typically is a small value.
       Figure 7.26 illustrates the response of the controlled DC-voltage power
    port of Figure 7.22, to the same sequence of events as described for Fig-
    ure 7.25, with the exception that the output of Kv (s) is augmented with the
    measure of Pext as the feed-forward signal. A comparison between Figures
    7.26(c) and 7.25(c) indicates that deviations of VDC from its reference value
    are considerably smaller in the control system with the feed-forward compen-
    sation. Due to the feed-forward compensation, the changes in Pext are rapidly
    transferred to Psref , which, as Figure 7.26(a) indicates, result in a faster re-
    sponse of Ps compared to the case without the feed-forward compensation
    (Fig. 7.25(a)).


7.5.3            Simpliﬁed and Accurate Models
In the dynamic model of the DC-bus voltage control developed in Section 7.5.1,
we employed the principle of power balance, taking into account the instantaneous
power of the VSC AC-side interface RL branches (reactors), that is, (7.91). However,
traditionally, in the technical literature the instantaneous power of the interface
reactors is ignored and Pt = Ps is assumed [73]–[76]. Let us refer to this model as the
                                               CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT          201

simpliﬁed model. Replacing Ps by Pt in (7.83), we deduce the simpliﬁed model as

                              2
                            C dVDC
                                   = Pext − Ploss − Ps ,                            (7.106)
                            2  dt

which describes a linear model with VDC 2 as the output, P as the control input, and
                                                            s
Pext and Ploss as the disturbance inputs. Based on (7.106), the transfer function from
       2 is
Ps to VDC

                                                         
                                                         2 1
                          Gv (s) = VDC
                                    2
                                       (s)/Ps (s) = −        .                      (7.107)
                                                         C s

As (7.107) indicates, the simpliﬁed model is equivalent to the accurate model of
(7.95), if the VSC system exchanges zero power with the AC system or equivalently if
the time constant τ is zero. This, in turn, is equivalent to the fact that the compensator
design based on the simpliﬁed model of (7.107) is as if Kv (s) is designed based on
the accurate model of (7.95) for the zero real-power operating point. As discussed
in Example 7.4, the zero real-power operating point is not the worst-case scenario
in terms of the compensator design since the loop-gain phase further drops in the
rectifying mode of operation. The simpliﬁed model also fails to reveal the phase
roll-off of the loop gain under the rectifying mode of operation. Consequently, the
compensator design based on the simpliﬁed model of (7.107) may result in poor
dynamic performance or even instabilities [72], as further highlighted in Example 7.5.



             2500 (a)
 Pext (kW)




                0
             –780



             2500
 Ps (kW)




                    (b)

               0
             –780



             1250 (c)
 V DC (V)




              660

               0
                    0               0.1372                    0.3                     0.5
                                                   time (s)

FIGURE 7.27 Instability of the DC-bus voltage controller in the rectifying mode of operation;
Example 7.5.
202       GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN αβ-FRAME


           1000

            800
                                Pext =
            600                 −2.5 MW

            400                                                            Pext =
                                                                           2.5 MW
            200

              0
      s




           −200

           −400                     Pext = 0

           −600

           −800

          −1000
             −4000     −3000         −2000            −1000           0             1000
                                                 jw

  FIGURE 7.28 Root loci of the closed-loop DC-bus voltage controller; Example 7.5.


  EXAMPLE 7.5          Instability in the Rectifying Mode of Operation
  Consider the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 7.22 with parameters
  L = 200 ␮H, R = 2.38 m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC = 1250 V, and
  fs = 1620 Hz. The line-to-line rms voltage of the AC system is 480 V and its
  frequency is 377 rad/s. The α- and β-axis compensators of the real-/reactive-
  power controller are
                                                                      
                               s + 16.34         s + 966          s+2
  Kα (s) = Kβ (s) = 2516                                                       []. (7.108)
                               s2 + 3772        s + 5633        s + 0.05

  Each compensator provides a closed-loop bandwidth of about ωb = 3820 rad/s
  (see Example 3.6 for details) for the corresponding loop. The transfer function
  of the feed-forward ﬁlter is Gff (s) = 1/(8 × 10−6 s + 1). In this example,
  the PWM switching frequency is smaller than that of the VSC system of
  Example 7.4. Therefore, to achieve low harmonic distortion for the AC-side
  current, inductances of the interface reactors are larger than those of the VSC
  system of Example 7.4. However, since the switching frequency is reduced,
  the VSC system of this example can operate at a relatively higher power level.
     We design the DC-bus voltage controller based on the simpliﬁed model of
  (7.107). Thus, the (simpliﬁed) plant is an integrator and has the phase −90◦
  regardless of the operating point. Assuming that a phase margin of 45◦ is re-
  quired at a gain crossover frequency of ωc = 700 rad/s, following the procedure
                                   CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT            203

of Example 7.4 we deduce

                                   s + 290
                Kv (s) = 5700                  [−1 ].                     (7.109)
                                s (s + 1688)

Since the simpliﬁed model of (7.107) does not show any dependence on
the system operating point, one expects the closed-loop system to remain
stable over the entire system operating range. This, however, is not the case.
Figure 7.27 illustrates that the system is initially stable and VDC is regulated
when Pext = 2500 kW. However, the system becomes oscillatory and unstable
when Pext is changed from 2500 to −780 kW. The reason can be explained
by the accurate model of (7.95). Figure 7.28 illustrates loci of the closed-loop
poles when the accurate model of (7.95) is employed in the analysis. Figure
7.28 illustrates that as Pext varies from 2500 to −2500 kW, the real parts of
a pair of complex-conjugate poles move from the left-half plane (LHP) to the
RHP. Therefore, the closed-loop system becomes unstable beyond a certain
negative power. In this example, while the controlled DC-voltage power port
can transfer 2.5 MW in the inverting mode of operation, it cannot reach more
than 30% of its rated capacity in the rectifying mode of operation.
8 Grid-Imposed Frequency VSC
          System: Control in dq-Frame


8.1   INTRODUCTION

Chapter 5 presented dynamic models for the two-level VSC in αβ-frame and dq-
frame and brieﬂy discussed its control based on generic block diagrams of Figures
5.5 and 5.7. Chapter 6 introduced the three-level NPC as an extension of the two-
level VSC and established that the dynamic model of the three-level NPC is identical
to that of the two-level VSC, except that the three-level NPC requires a DC-side
voltage equalizing system to maintain DC-side capacitor voltages, each at half the
net DC-side voltage. Thus, Chapter 6 presented a uniﬁed model for the three-level
NPC and the two-level VSC (Fig. 6.18 and 6.19). Chapter 7 introduced a class of
VSC systems referred to as grid-imposed frequency VSC systems. On the basis of the
uniﬁed model of Chapter 6, Chapter 7 presented αβ-frame models and controls for
two members of the family of the grid-imposed frequency VSC systems, namely, the
real-/reactive-power controller and the controlled DC-voltage power port. In parallel
with Chapter 7, this chapter presents dq-frame models and controls for the real-
/reactive-power controller and the controlled DC-voltage power port.
   As discussed in Chapter 7, compared to the abc-frame control, the αβ-frame
control of a grid-imposed frequency VSC system reduces the number of plants to
be controlled from three to two. Moreover, instantaneous decoupled control of the
real and reactive power, exchanged between the VSC system and the AC system,
is possible in αβ-frame. However, the control variables, that is, feedback signals,
feed-forward signals, and control signals are sinusoidal functions of time. It is shown
in this chapter that the dq-frame control of a grid-imposed VSC system features
all merits of the αβ-frame control, in addition to the advantage that the control
variables are DC quantities in the steady state. This feature it remarkably facilitates
the compensator design, especially in variable-frequency scenarios.
   To achieve zero steady-state error in the αβ-frame control, the bandwidth of the
closed-loop system must be adequately larger than the AC system frequency; alter-
natively, the compensators can include complex-conjugate pairs of poles at the AC
system frequency and other frequencies of interest, to increase the loop gain. In the
dq-frame control, however, zero steady-state error is readily achieved by including


Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

204
                          STRUCTURE OF GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                            205

integral terms in the compensators since the control variables are DC quantities [77].
The dq-frame representation and control of a grid-imposed VSC system is also con-
sistent with the approach used for the dynamic analysis of the large power system. The
small-signal dynamics of the power system is conventionally modeled and analyzed
in dq-frame [42].
    Compared to the αβ-frame control, the dq-frame control requires a synchroniza-
tion mechanism that is usually achieved through the phase-locked loop (PLL); this
requirement can be regarded a demerit of the dq-frame control.


8.2   STRUCTURE OF GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM

Figure 8.1 shows a schematic diagram of a grid-imposed frequency VSC system. The
VSC represents either a three-level NPC with a DC-side voltage equalizing scheme
or a two-level VSC. In either case, the VSC is modeled by a lossless power processor
including an equivalent DC-bus capacitor, a current source representing the VSC
switching power loss, and series on-state resistances at the AC side representing the
VSC conduction power loss, as Figure 8.1 shows. The DC side of the VSC may be
interfaced with a DC voltage source or a DC power source. Each phase of the VSC
is interfaced with the AC system via a series RL branch.
    In this chapter, as an approximation we consider an inﬁnitely stiff AC system.
Thus, the AC system is modeled by an ideal three-phase voltage source, Vsabc .1 It is
also assumed that Vsabc is balanced, sinusoidal, and of a relatively constant frequency.
The VSC system of Figure 8.1 exchanges the real- and reactive-power components


                                                                                   PCC
                                          VSC system                                        AC
                                                                                          system
                                                                              Qs
               is          iDC                                                Ps
      +
                                                       Vta                   L           Vsa
                                                               ia   R+ron
                                                                                         +
                                      Averaged         Vtb                   L           Vsb
                                                               ib   R+ron
   V DC       iloss        C         ideal three-                                        +      Vnull
                                     phase VSC         Vtc     ic            L           Vsc
                                                                    R+ron
                                                                                         +




                                      ma mb mc
          FIGURE 8.1 Schematic diagram of a grid-imposed frequency VSC system.


1 In Chapter 11, we investigate the dynamics of a VSC system under nonstiff AC system conditions.
206      GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


Ps (t) and Qs (t) with the AC system, at the point of common coupling (PCC). De-
pending on the control strategy, the VSC system of Figure 8.1 is used as either a real-/
reactive-power controller or a controlled DC-voltage power port. In Chapter 12, we
employ the real-/reactive-power controller as part of a back-to-back HVDC converter
system. The controlled DC-voltage power port is employed as part of the static com-
pensator (STATCOM), the back-to-back HVDC converter system, and variable-speed
wind-power units, in Chapters 11, 12, and 13, respectively.


8.3     REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER

The grid-imposed frequency VSC system of Figure 8.1 can be employed as a real-/
reactive-power controller. As such, the VSC DC side is connected in parallel with
a DC voltage source and the objective is to control the instantaneous real and reac-
tive power that the VSC system exchanges with the AC system, that is, Ps (t) and
Qs (t).


8.3.1    Current-Mode Versus Voltage-Mode Control
Two main methods exist for controlling Ps and Qs in the VSC system of Figure 8.1.
The ﬁrst approach that is known as voltage-mode control and illustrated in Figure 8.2
has been dominantly utilized in high-voltage/-power applications such as in FACTS
controllers [44, 45], although its industrial applications have also been reported [47].
Figure 8.2 illustrates that in a voltage-controlled VSC system, the real and reactive



                                                                          PCC
                                                                     Ps
                                                                     Qs
                                         VSC and PWM




                                                       Vtabc    L Vsabc      AC system
                          +                                                       +




                     Ps               Vtabc
                      –
           Psref              K1(s)        φ (t)
                                                           Phase shifter/scaler
                                                             of Figure 4.5
           Qsref              K2(s)         A (t)
                      –
                     Qs
                                         Vsabc
 FIGURE 8.2 Schematic diagram of a voltage-controlled real-/reactive-power controller.
                                                   REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                              207

power are controlled, respectively, by the phase angle and the amplitude of the VSC
AC-side terminal voltage relative to the PCC voltage [46]. If the amplitude and phase
angle of Vtabc are close to those of Vsabc , the real and reactive power are almost
decoupled and two independent compensators can be employed for their control
(Fig. 8.2). The voltage-mode control is simple and has a low number of control loops.
However, the main shortcoming of the voltage-mode control is that there is no control
loop closed on the VSC line current. Consequently, the VSC is not protected against
overcurrents, and the current may undergo large excursions if the power commands
are rapidly changed or faults take place in the AC system.
   The second approach to the control of the real and reactive power in the VSC system
of Figure 8.1 is referred to as the current-mode control. In this approach, the VSC
line current is tightly regulated by a dedicated current-control scheme, through the
VSC AC-side terminal voltage. Then, the real and reactive power are controlled by the
phase angle and the amplitude of the VSC line current with respect to the PCC voltage.
Thus, due to the current regulation scheme, the VSC is protected against overcurrent
conditions. Other advantages of the current-mode control include robustness against
variations in parameters of the VSC system and the AC system, superior dynamic
performance, and higher control precision [68]. We demonstrated the basics of the
current-mode control strategy in Chapter 3 and will exclusively focus on this method
throughout the rest of the book.
   Figure 8.3 shows a schematic diagram of a current-controlled real-/reactive-power
controller, illustrating that the control is performed in dq-frame. Thus, Ps and Qs are


                                                                                                  PCC
                                               VSC system                                                 AC
                                     “real-/reactive-power controller”                                  system
                                                                                                 Qs
                 is             iDC
                                                                                                 Ps
                         +
                                                                    Vta                                 Vsa
                                                                              ia R+ron L
                                                                                                        +
                                            Averaged                Vtb                                 Vsb
                                                                              ib R+ron L
V DC +          iloss   V DC     C         ideal three-                                                 +      Vnull
                                           phase VSC                Vtc                                 Vsc
                                                                              ic R+ron L
                                                                                                        +



                                           ma mb mc
                                            Saturation at ± 1
                                                                                    ρ            abc
                                                                ρ            abc            dq
                                                                      dq            Vsd
                                       ρ     abc
                                                 dq                                 Vsq
         V DC                                md mq                   id iq
                                                                                    idref
                                                                                    iqref
                                                                                            Reference       Psref
                             Compensators in dq-frame                                        signal
                                                                                            generator       Qsref
FIGURE 8.3 Schematic diagram of a current-controlled real-/reactive-power controller in
dq-frame.
208     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


controlled by the line current components id and iq . The feedback and feed-forward
signals are ﬁrst transformed to the dq-frame and then processed by compensators to
produce the control signals in dq-frame. Finally, the control signals are transformed
to the abc-frame and fed to the VSC (Fig. 8.3). To protect the VSC, the reference
commands idref and iqref are limited by the corresponding saturation blocks (not
shown in the ﬁgure). It is noted that the block diagram of Figure 8.3 is a special
case of the general block diagram of Figure 4.27. In Chapter 12, we employ the
real-/reactive-power controller as part of the back-to-back HVDC converter system.


8.3.2   Representation of Space Phasors in dq-Frame
In this chapter, we need to express space phasors in dq-frame. The transformation
and its inverse were extensively discussed in Chapter 4. However, they are brieﬂy
reviewed in this section, for ease of reference.
                               →
                               −
    Consider the space phasor f (t) = fα + jfβ . The dq- to αβ-frame transformation
is deﬁned as

                               →
                               −
                    fd + jfq = f (t)e−jρ(t) = (fα + jfβ )e−jρ(t) ,               (8.1)

                           →
                           −
which is a phase shift in f (t) by −ρ(t). The angle ρ(t) can be chosen arbitrarily.
                            →
                            −
However, if, for example, f (t) = f ej(ωt+θ0 ) , then choosing ρ(t) to be equal to ωt
results in the space phasor

                        fd + jfq = f ej(ωt+θ0 ) e−jωt = f ejθ0 ,
                                         
                                        →
                                        −
                                        f (t)


which is no longer time-varying and, therefore, fd and fq are DC quantities. The
inverse transformation is

                        →
                        −
                        f (t) = fα + jfβ = (fd + jfq )ejρ(t) .                   (8.2)


8.3.3   Dynamic Model of Real-/Reactive-Power Controller
Assume that the AC system voltage in the VSC system of Figure 8.3 is expressed as

                                  s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ) ,
                        Vsa (t) = V
                                                          
                                                       2π
                        Vsb (t) = Vs cos ω0 t + θ0 −         ,
                                                         3
                                                          
                                  s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π ,
                        Vsc (t) = V                                              (8.3)
                                                         3
                                            REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER        209

      s is the peak value of the line-to-neutral voltage, ω0 is the AC system (source)
where V
frequency, and θ0 is the source initial phase angle. Based on (4.2), the space-phasor
equivalent of Vs−abc is

                                     →
                                     −        s ej(ω0 t+θ0 ) .
                                     Vs (t) = V                                   (8.4)


Dynamics of the AC side of the VSC system of Figure 8.3 are described by the
following space-phasor equation (refer to (7.11) for details):

                                 →
                                 −
                                d i              → −
                                                 −    → −  →
                            L       = −(R + ron ) i + Vt − Vs .                   (8.5)
                                 dt

                 →
                 −
Substituting for Vs from (8.4) in (8.5), we deduce

                           →
                           −
                          d i              → −
                                           −    →  j(ω0 t+θ0 )
                      L       = −(R + ron ) i + Vt − V se       .                 (8.6)
                           dt

                                                                         →
                                                                         −
Then, we use (8.2) to express (8.6) in a dq-frame. Thus, substituting for i = idq ejρ
    →
    −
and Vt = Vtdq ejρ in (8.6), we deduce


               d 0        1             0       1 0        1
                                                              s ej(ω0 t+θ0 ) ,
           L       idq ejρ = −(R + ron ) idq ejρ + Vtdq ejρ − V                   (8.7)
               dt


where fdq = fd + jfq . Equation (8.7) can be rewritten as

                         
         d 0 1         dρ                                s ej(ω0 t+θ0 −ρ) .
       L    idq = −j L      idq − (R + ron )idq + Vtdq − V                        (8.8)
         dt            dt


Decomposing (8.8) into real and imaginary components, we deduce

                   
         did     dρ                                s cos (ω0 t + θ0 − ρ) ,
       L     = L       iq − (R + ron ) id + Vtd − V                            (8.9)
         dt      dt
                      
         diq        dρ                               s sin (ω0 t + θ0 − ρ) . (8.10)
       L     =− L         id − (R + ron ) iq + Vtq − V
         dt         dt
210     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


Equations (8.9) and (8.10) are not in the standard state-space form. Thus, we introduce
the new control variable ω to (8.9) and (8.10), where ω = dρ/dt. This yields

              did                                  s cos(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ),
            L     = Lω(t)iq − (R + ron )id + Vtd − V                                     (8.11)
               dt
              diq                                    s sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ),
            L     = −Lω(t)id − (R + ron )iq + Vtq − V                                    (8.12)
               dt
            dρ
                = ω(t).                                                                  (8.13)
            dt

In (8.11)–(8.13), id , iq , and ρ are the state variables, and Vtd , Vtq , and ω are the control
inputs. The system described by (8.11)–(8.13) is nonlinear due to the presence of the
terms ωid , ωiq , cos(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ), and sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ).
    To further investigate (8.11)–(8.13), assume that ρ has a zero initial condition and
ω(t) ≡ 0. Consequently, ρ remains zero at all times, and (8.11) and (8.12) assume the
forms

                      did                         s cos(ω0 t + θ0 ),
                    L     = −(R + ron )id + Vtd − V                                      (8.14)
                      dt
                      diq                         s sin(ω0 t + θ0 ).
                    L     = −(R + ron )iq + Vtq − V                                      (8.15)
                      dt

Equations (8.14) and (8.15) describe two, decoupled, ﬁrst-order systems that are
excited by inputs −V  s cos(ω0 t + θ0 ) and −V s sin(ω0 t + θ0 ), respectively. Thus, the
superposition principle requires that id and iq also include sinusoidal components,
irrespective of Vtd and Vtq . This result is expected since if ρ = 0, then based on (8.1)
the dq-frame is the same as the αβ-frame in which the signals are sinusoidal functions
of time. In other words, (8.14) and (8.15) represent the VSC system in αβ-frame;
comparison of (8.14) and (8.15), respectively, with (7.12) and (7.13) conﬁrms this
conclusion.
    The foregoing discussion shows that the usefulness of the dq-frame depends on
proper selection of ω and ρ. For the VSC system of Figure 8.3, if ω = ω0 and ρ(t) =
ω0 t + θ0 , then (8.11) and (8.12) take the forms

                          did                                  s ,
                        L     = Lω0 iq − (R + ron )id + Vtd − V                          (8.16)
                          dt
                          diq
                        L     = −Lω0 id − (R + ron )iq + Vtq ,                           (8.17)
                          dt

which describe a second-order linear system that is excited by the constant input V     s .
Thus, if Vtd and Vtq are DC variables, id and iq are also DC variables in the steady state.
The mechanism to ensure ρ(t) = ω0 t + θ0 is referred to as the PLL. The following
section presents the structure, model, and stabilization of the PLL.
                                        REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER            211

8.3.4  Phase-Locked Loop (PLL)
                 →
                 −
Substituting for Vs (t) from (8.4) in (8.1), we deduce

                                   s cos(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ),
                             Vsd = V                                            (8.18)
                                   s sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ).
                             Vsq = V                                            (8.19)

Thus, (8.11)–(8.13) can be rewritten as

                     did
                   L     = Lω(t)iq − (R + ron )id + Vtd − Vsd ,                 (8.20)
                      dt
                     diq
                   L     = −Lω(t)id − (R + ron )iq + Vtq − Vsq ,                (8.21)
                      dt
                   dρ
                       = ω(t).                                                  (8.22)
                   dt
Based on (8.19), ρ(t) = ω0 t + θ0 corresponds to Vsq = 0. Therefore, we devise a
mechanism to regulate Vsq at zero. This can be achieved based on the following
feedback law:

                                   ω(t) = H(p)Vsq (t),                          (8.23)

where H(p) is a linear transfer function (compensator) and p = d(·)/dt is a differ-
entiation operator. Substituting for Vsq from (8.19) in (8.23), and substituting for ω
from (8.23) in (8.22), we deduce

                           dρ       s sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ).
                              = H(p)V                                           (8.24)
                           dt
Equation (8.24) describes a nonlinear dynamic system, which is referred to as PLL
[49], [78–80]. The function of the PLL is to regulate ρ at ω0 t + θ0 . However,
in view of its nonlinear characteristic, the PLL can exhibit unsatisfactory behav-
ior under certain conditions. For example, if the PLL starts from an initial condition
corresponding to ρ(0) = 0 and ω(0) = 0, then the term V   s H(p) sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ) in
(8.24) is a sinusoidal function of time with frequency ω0 . Then, if H(s) has a low-
pass frequency response, the right-hand side of (8.24) and also dρ/dt exhibit small
sinusoidal perturbations about zero, the PLL falls in a limit cycle, and ρ does not
track ω0 t + θ0 . To prevent the limit cycle from taking place, the control law can be
modiﬁed as

             ω(t) = H(p)Vsq (t),     ω(0) = ω0 and ωmin ≤ ω ≤ ωmax ,            (8.25)

where ω(t) has the initial value ω(0) = ω0 and is limited to the lower and upper limits
of, respectively, ωmin and ωmax . ωmin and ωmax are selected to be close to ω0 and
thus to deﬁne a narrow range of variations for ω(t). On the other hand, the range of
212     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


                                    Compensator Saturation
                        e                                      ω         1       ρ
  ω 0t + θ 0                  V̂s       H(s)
                    –                                                    s



                    FIGURE 8.4 Control block diagram of the PLL.



variations should be selected adequately wide to permit excursions of ω(t) during
transients. If the PLL tracks ω0 t + θ0 , the term ω0 t + θ0 − ρ is close to zero and
sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ) ≈ (ω0 t + θ0 − ρ). Therefore, (8.24) can be simpliﬁed to

                              dρ  s H(p)(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ).
                                 =V                                               (8.26)
                              dt

Equation (8.26) represents a classical feedback control loop in which ω0 t + θ0 is the
reference input, ρ is the output, and Vs H(s) is the transfer function of the effective
compensator, as shown in the block diagram of Figure 8.4.
   Figure 8.5 illustrates a schematic diagram of the PLL based on (8.19), (8.22), and
(8.23). Figure 8.5 shows that the PLL transforms Vsabc to Vsdq (based on (4.73)) and
adjusts the rotational speed of the dq-frame, that is, ω, such that Vsq is forced to zero
in the steady state. The end result is that ρ = ω0 t + θ0 and Vsd = V   s . It should be
pointed out that in the block diagram of Figure 8.5, the integrator of (8.22) is realized
by means of a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO). The VCO can be regarded as a
resettable integrator whose output, ρ, is reset to zero whenever it reaches 2π.




                        FIGURE 8.5 Schematic diagram of the PLL.
                                          REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER             213

8.3.5   Compensator Design for PLL
Dynamic performance of the PLL is highly inﬂuenced by the compensator H(s).
Consider the block diagram of Figure 8.4 indicating that the reference signal, ω0 t + θ0 ,
is composed of a constant component, that is, θ0 , and a ramp function, that is, ω0 t.
Since the loop gain includes an integral term, ρ tracks the constant component of the
reference signal with zero steady-state error. However, to ensure a zero steady-state
error for the ramp component, the loop gain must include at least two integrators.
Therefore, H(s) must include at least one integral term, that is, one pole at s = 0. The
other poles and zeros of H(s) are determined mainly on the basis of the closed-loop
bandwidth of the PLL and stability indices such as phase margin and gain margin.
    Another consideration in designing H(s) is the issue of unbalanced and/or har-
monically distorted three-phase voltages. Assume that Vsabc represents an unbalanced
voltage with a negative-sequence fundamental component and a ﬁfth-order harmonic
component [81], as

                                             s cos (ω0 t + θ0 )
                    s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ) + k1 V
          Vsa (t) = V
                                              s cos (5ω0 t + φ5 ) ,
                                          +k5 V
                                                                       
                    s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 2π + k1 V
          Vsb (t) = V                             s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π
                                        3                               3
                                                                       
                                                                    4π
                                          +k5 Vs cos 5ω0 t + φ5 −         ,
                                                                      3
                                                                       
                    s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π + k1 V
          Vsc (t) = V                             s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 2π
                                        3                               3
                                                                       
                                              s cos 5ω0 t + φ5 − 2π ,
                                          +k5 V                                    (8.27)
                                                                      3

where k1 and k5 are the amplitudes of the negative-sequence (fundamental) and ﬁfth-
order harmonic components, respectively, relative to the amplitude of the positive-
sequence (fundamental) component. Based on (4.2), the space phasor corresponding
to Vsabc is
               →  j(ω0 t+θ0 )
               −                                          s e−j(5ω0 t+φ5 ) .
                                    s e−j(ω0 t+θ0 ) + k5 V
               Vs = Vs e       + k1 V                                              (8.28)

If the PLL of Figure 8.5 is under a steady-state operating condition, that is, ρ =
ω0 t + θ0 , then based on (8.1) Vsd and Vsq are

                         s cos (2ω0 t + 2θ0 ) + k5 V
                 s + k1 V
           Vsd = V                                  s cos (6ω0 t + θ0 + φ5 ) ,    (8.29)
                                                s sin (6ω0 t + θ0 + φ5 ).
                     s sin (2ω0 t + 2θ0 ) − k5 V
           Vsq = −k1 V                                                             (8.30)

Equations (8.29) and (8.30) indicate that, in addition to DC components, Vsd and
Vsq include sinusoidal components with frequencies 2ω0 and 6ω0 . Typical values
214     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


of k1 and k5 are assumed to be 0.01 and 0.025, respectively [81]. However, under
single-phase to ground faults, k1 can be as large as 0.5. The sinusoidal components
of Vsq must be attenuated by H(s). Otherwise, ω and ρ also exhibit ﬂuctuations that
are modulated with feedback and control signals, through abc- to dq-frame and dq-
to abc-frame transformations, and result in generation of undesirable voltage/current
distortions in the VSC system.
   Between the two AC components of Vsq , the component with frequency 2ω0 is
more important. The reason is that (i) the frequency of this component is three times
lower than that of the other component and (ii) the magnitude of this component, k1 ,
can be signiﬁcantly larger than that of the other component, for example, during a fault.
One approach to attenuate the double-frequency component of Vsq is to ensure that
H(s) exhibits a strong low-pass characteristic. However, this method may compromise
the PLL closed-loop bandwidth. Alternatively, one can include in H(s) one pair of
complex-conjugate zeros, at s = ±j2ω0 , to eliminate the double-frequency ripple of
Vsq . The advantage of this technique is that the PLL closed-loop bandwidth is not
sacriﬁced and can be selected to be arbitrarily large. Example 8.1 illustrates the second
PLL design approach.

   EXAMPLE 8.1          Compensator Design for the PLL
   Consider the PLL of Figure 8.5 whose input is Vsabc deﬁned by (8.27), where
   ω0 = 2π × 60 rad/s and V s = 391 V. The objective is to design the PLL com-
   pensator H(s).
      As explained in Section 8.3.5, H(s) must include one pole at s = 0 and the
   complex-conjugate zeros s = ±j2ω0 . In addition, to ensure that the loop gain
   magnitude continues to drop with the slope of −40 dB/dec for ω > 2ω0 , a
   double real pole at s = −2ω0 is included in H(s). Thus,

                                             
                                         h        s2 + (2ω0 )2
                           H(s) =                               F (s),         (8.31)
                                        sn
                                        V         s (s + 2ω0 )2


   where Vsn is the nominal value of V
                                      s and F (s) is the proper transfer function
   with no zero at s = 0. Based on the block diagram of Figure 8.4, the loop gain
   is formulated as

                                       s2 + (2ω0 )2
                              (s) = h 2            F (s).                     (8.32)
                                      s (s + 2ω0 )2

   Let us assume that we need a gain crossover frequency of ωc = 200 rad/s and a
   phase margin of 60◦ . If hF (s) = 1, it can be calculated that ∠(j200) = −210◦ .
   Thus, to achieve the required phase margin, F (j200) must add 90◦ to ∠(j200).
   As discussed in Example 3.6, a lead compensator can offer an optimum phase
   advance to the loop gain. In this example, the required phase advance is fairly
   large. Consequently, F (s) can be composed of two cascaded lead compensators,
                                          REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER            215

each to provide 45◦ at 200 rad/s. Thus,
                                                             
                                     s + (p/α)        s + (p/α)
                       F (s) =                                   ,            (8.33)
                                       s+p              s+p

where
                                           √
                                     p = ωc α                                 (8.34)
                                           1 + sin δm
                                     α=               ,                       (8.35)
                                           1 − sin δm

and δm is the phase of each lead compensator at ωc . If δm = 45◦ , based on
(8.33)–(8.35), we calculate F (s) as
                                                        2
                                                s + 83
                                 F (s) =                      .               (8.36)
                                               s + 482

Substituting for F (s) from (8.36) in (8.32), we deduce
                        0            10                1
                       h s2 + 568,516 s2 + 166s + 6889
          (s) = 2 0 2                  10                 1 . (8.37)
                 s s + 1508s + 568,516 s2 + 964s + 232,324

                                       sn = 391 V that h = 2.68 × 105 . There-
It then follows from |(j200)| = 1 and V
fore, h/V sn = 685.42 and the ﬁnal compensator is
                 0            10                1
           685.42 s2 + 568,516 s2 + 166s + 6889
  H(s) = 0 2                  10                  1                   [(rad/s)/V].
        s s + 1508s + 568,516 s2 + 964s + 232,324
                                                                              (8.38)

   Figure 8.6 depicts the frequency response of (jω) based on the compensator
of (8.38). It is observed that |(jω)| drops with the slope of −40 dB/dec, for
ω  ωc = 200. However, around ωc the slope of |(jω)| reduces to about −20
dB/dec and ∠(jω) rises to about −120◦ at ω = ωc , corresponding to a phase
margin of 60◦ . Figure 8.6 also illustrates that |(jω)| continues to drop with
a slope of −40 dB/dec for ω > ωc . This characteristic is desired as the AC
components of Vsq due to the harmonic distortion of Vsabc are attenuated. In
particular, at ω = 6ω0 , |(jω)| is about −30 dB.
   Figure 8.7 illustrates the start-up transient of the PLL. Figure 8.7 shows that,
from t = 0 to t = 0.07 s, the compensator output is saturated at ωmin = 2π ×
55 rad/s and, therefore, Vsd and Vsq vary with time. At about t = 0.07 s, Vsq
crosses zero and intends to become negative. Thus, H(s) increases ω to regulate
Vsq at zero. Figure 8.7 indicates that Vsq is regulated at zero within 0.15 s. It
should be noted that if ωmin is selected closer to ω0 , the start-up transient period
becomes shorter. However, ωmin cannot be selected too close to ω0 since the
PLL would not be able to quickly react to other types of disturbance.
216              GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME




                 FIGURE 8.6 Open-loop frequency response of the PLL of Example 8.1.


         Figure 8.8 illustrates the dynamic response of the PLL to a sudden imbalance
      in Vsabc . Initially, the PLL is in a steady state. At t = 0.05 s, the AC system
      voltage Vsabc becomes unbalanced such that V     s and k1 undergo step changes,
      respectively, from 391 to 260 V and from zero to 0.5, and at t = 0.15 s, Vsabc


             391
Vsabc (V)




                0

            −391

                75
    ω/2π (Hz)




                70
                65
                60
                55


             6.28
ρ (rad)




                0

             391
  Vsdq (V)




                                                                                      Vsd
             260                                                                      Vsq
                0

                     0              0.05               0.1              0.15                0.2
                                                    time (s)

                         FIGURE 8.7 Start-up response of the PLL of Example 8.1.
                      CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER               217

             391
Vsabc (V)

             260
               0
            −260
            −391


                 64
     ω/2π (Hz)




                 60

                 56

              6.28
ρ (rad)




                 0


              391                                                                     Vsd
   Vsdq (V)




              260                                                                     Vsq
                  0

                      0            0.05             0.1               0.15                  0.2
                                                 time (s)

FIGURE 8.8 Response of the PLL of Example 8.1 to a sudden AC system voltage imbalance.


        reverts to its balanced predisturbance condition. In response to the voltage
        imbalance, H(s) transiently changes ω, as Figure 8.8 shows, to maintain the
        DC component of Vsq at zero. Figure 8.8 also shows that Vsq (and Vsd ) includes a
        120-Hz sinusoidal ripple due to the negative-sequence component of Vsabc . The
        ripple is, however, suppressed by H(s), and ω and ρ remain free of distortion.
            Figure 8.9 depicts the dynamic response of the PLL to two stepwise changes
        in ω0 , the ﬁrst one from 2π × 60 = 377 rad/s to 2π × 63 = 396 rad/s at t = 0.05
        s, and the other from 396 rad/s to 2π × 57 = 358 rad/s at t = 0.1 s. As Figure
        8.9 shows, Vsq is rapidly regulated at zero and ω tracks the changes.
            Equation (8.31) denotes that H(s) is normalized such that the constant gain
        of the loop gain h is independent of V  sn . Thus, in subsequent chapters when we
        need a PLL, we will employ the compensator of (8.38), but modify its constant
        gain, that is, h/V                   sn for the speciﬁc problem in hand, based on
                          sn , according to V
        h = 2.68 × 105 .



8.4 CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER
CONTROLLER

With reference to the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3, based on
(4.83) and (4.84), the real and reactive power delivered to the AC system at
218               GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


               391
Vsabc (V)


                 0

            −391
     ω/2π (Hz)




                 63
                 60
                 57


               6.28
 ρ (rad)




                 0


               391                                                                Vsd
    Vsdq (V)




               260                                                                Vsq
                 0

                      0          0.05                   0.1              0.15           0.2
                                                     time (s)

FIGURE 8.9 Response of the PLL of Example 8.1 to a sudden AC system frequency change.


the PCC are

                                       3-                             .
                              Ps (t) =   Vsd (t)id (t) + Vsq (t)iq (t) ,          (8.39)
                                       2
                                       3-                                .
                              Qs (t) =    −Vsd (t)iq (t) + Vsq (t)id (t) ,        (8.40)
                                       2

where Vsd and Vsq are the AC system dq-frame voltage components and cannot be
controlled by the VSC system. As described in Section 8.3.4, if the PLL is in a steady
state, Vsq = 0 and (8.39) and (8.40) can be rewritten as

                                                  3
                                         Ps (t) =   Vsd (t)id (t),                (8.41)
                                                  2
                                                     3
                                         Qs (t) = − Vsd (t)iq (t).                (8.42)
                                                     2

Therefore, based on (8.41) and (8.42), Ps (s) and Qs (s) can be controlled by id and iq ,
respectively. Let us introduce
          CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                   219

                                             2
                              idref (t) =        Psref (t),                      (8.43)
                                            3Vsd
                                               2
                              iqref (t) = −        Qsref (t).                    (8.44)
                                              3Vsd

   Then, if the control system can provide fast reference tracking, that is, id ≈ idref
and iq ≈ iqref , then Ps ≈ Psref and Qs ≈ Qsref , that is, Ps (t) and Qs (t), can be
independently controlled by their respective reference commands. Since Vsd is a DC
variable (in the steady state), idref and iqref are also DC variables if Psref and Qsref
are constant signals. Thus, as expected, the control system in dq-frame deals with DC
variables, unlike the control system in αβ-frame that deals with sinusoidal signals.


8.4.1   VSC Current Control
The dq-frame control of the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3 is based on
(8.11) and (8.12). Assuming a steady-state operating condition and substituting for
ω(t) = ω0 in (8.11) and (8.12), we deduce

                       did
                     L     = Lω0 iq − (R + ron )id + Vtd − Vsd ,                 (8.45)
                       dt
                       diq
                     L     = −Lω0 id − (R + ron )iq + Vtq − Vsq ,                (8.46)
                       dt

in which, based on (5.22) and (5.23), Vtd and Vtq are

                                            VDC
                                  Vtd (t) =     md (t),                          (8.47)
                                             2
                                            VDC
                                  Vtq (t) =     mq (t).                          (8.48)
                                             2

Equations (8.47) and (8.48) represent the VSC model in dq-frame. The model is
applicable to both the two-level VSC and the three-level NPC. In (8.45) and (8.46),
id and iq are state variables, Vtd and Vtq are control inputs, and Vsd and Vsq are
disturbance inputs. Due to the presence of Lω0 terms in (8.45) and (8.46), dynamics
of id and iq are coupled. To decouple the dynamics, we determine md and mq as

                                    2 0                    1
                           md =           ud − Lω0 iq + Vsd ,                    (8.49)
                                  VDC
                                    2 0                    1
                           mq =           uq + Lω0 id + Vsq ,                    (8.50)
                                  VDC

where ud and uq are two new control inputs [69, 82]. Substituting for md and mq in
(8.47) and (8.48), respectively, from (8.49) and (8.50), and substituting for Vtd and
220        GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


                                                    Feed-forward
                                                        filter           Vsd
                     dq-frame current controller
                     d-axis compensator
                                                       Gff (s)
                                                                           AC-side dynamics
                 –                                   md    VSC             –
   idref              ed             ud                            Vtd             1
                           kd (s)                           x                                  id
                                                                               Ls+(R+ron)

                id Decoupling feed-forward                               Lω0
                           Lω0                      V DC
                                             V DC
                iq                             2      2
                           Lω0
                                                                         Lω0
                      q-axis compensator
                     eq              uq              mq            Vtq     –       1
   iqref                   kq (s)                           x                                  iq
                 –                                                         – Ls+(R+ron)
                                                       Gff (s)
                                                    Feed-forward         Vsq
                                                        filter

           FIGURE 8.10 Control block diagram of a current-controlled VSC system.



Vtq from the resultant in (8.45) and (8.46), we deduce

                                         did
                                       L     = −(R + ron )id + ud ,                           (8.51)
                                         dt
                                         diq
                                       L     = −(R + ron )iq + uq .                           (8.52)
                                         dt

Equations (8.51) and (8.52) describe two decoupled, ﬁrst-order, linear systems. Based
on (8.51) and (8.52), id and iq can be controlled by ud and uq , respectively. Figure 8.10
shows a block representation of the d- and q-axis current controllers of the VSC system
in which ud and uq are the outputs of two corresponding compensators. The d-axis
compensator processes ed = idref − id and provides ud . Then, based on (8.49), ud
contributes to md . Similarly, the q-axis compensator processes eq = iqref − iq and
provides uq that, based on (8.50), contributes to mq . The VSC then ampliﬁes md and
mq by a factor of VDC /2 and generates Vtd and Vtq that, in turn, control id and iq
based on (8.45) and (8.46). On the basis of the above-mentioned control process, one
can sketch the simpliﬁed control block diagram of Figure 8.11, which is equivalent
to the control system of Figure 8.10. It should be noted that in the control system of
Figure 8.10, all the control, feed-forward, and feedback signals are DC quantities in
the steady state.
    Figure 8.11 indicates that the control plants in both d- and q-axis current-control
loops are identical. Therefore, the corresponding compensators can also be identical.
Consider the d-axis control loop. Unlike the αβ-frame control where the compensators
are fairly difﬁcult to optimize and typically are of high dynamic orders, kd (s) can be
a simple proportional-integral (PI) compensator to enable tracking of a DC reference
             CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                 221


                         d-axis closed-loop current controller


     idref               ed                     ud              1
                                  kd (s)                                           id
                                                            Ls+(R+ron)
                     –


                         q-axis closed-loop current controller

                         eq                     uq              1
     iqref                        kq (s)                                           iq
                                                            Ls+(R+ron)
                     –


FIGURE 8.11 Simpliﬁed block diagram of the current-controlled VSC system of Figure 8.10.


command. Let
                                              kp s + ki
                                   kd (s) =             ,                         (8.53)
                                                  s

where kp and ki are proportional and integral gains, respectively. Thus, the loop gain
is
                                   
                                    kp       s + ki /kp
                          (s) =                           .                    (8.54)
                                   Ls s + (R + ron )/L

It is noted that due to the plant pole at s = −(R + ron )/L, which is fairly close to the
origin, the magnitude and the phase of the loop gain start to drop from a relatively low
frequency. Thus, the plant pole is ﬁrst canceled by the compensator zero s = −ki /kp ,
and the loop gain assumes the form (s) = kp /(Ls). Then, the closed-loop transfer
function, that is, (s)/(1 + (s)), becomes

                               Id (s)                  1
                                        = Gi (s) =          ,                     (8.55)
                              Idref (s)            τi s + 1

if

                                   kp = L/τi ,                                    (8.56)
                                   ki = (R + ron )/τi .                           (8.57)

where τi is the time constant of the resultant closed-loop system.
222     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


   Equation (8.55) indicates that, if kp and ki are selected based on (8.56) and (8.57),
the response of id (t) to idref (t) is based on a ﬁrst-order transfer function whose time
constant τi is a design choice. τi should be made small for a fast current-control
response but adequately large such that 1/τi , that is, the bandwidth of the closed-loop
control system, is considerably smaller, for example, 10 times, than the switching
frequency of the VSC (expressed in rad/s). Depending on the requirements of a speciﬁc
application and the converter switching frequency, τi is typically selected in the range
of 0.5–5 ms. The same compensator as kd (s) can also be adopted for the q-axis
compensator kq (s). Example 8.2 demonstrates the design procedures.

   EXAMPLE         8.2     Dynamic      Performance       of   Real-/Reactive-Power
   Controller
   Consider the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3 with parameters L =
   100 ␮H, R = 0.75 m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC = 1250 V, and
   fs = 3420 Hz. The AC system frequency and line-to-line rms voltage are ω0 =
   377 rad/s and 480 V (i.e., Vsd = 391 V ), respectively. The transfer function of
   the feed-forward ﬁlter is Gff (s) = 1/(8 × 10−6 s + 1). The PLL of Example
   8.1 is used to synchronize the dq-frame to the AC system voltage.
      Assuming a closed-loop time constant of τi = 2.0 ms, based on (8.56) and
   (8.57), we deduce the following d- and q-axis compensators:

                                             0.05s + 0.815
                         kd (s) = kq (s) =                     [].
                                                   s
   The system is subjected to the following sequence of events: until t = 0.15 s,
   the gating pulses are blocked and the controllers are inactive. This permits the
   PLL to reach its steady state. At t = 0.15 s, the gating pulses are unblocked and
   the controllers are activated, while Psref = Qsref ≡ 0. At t = 0.20 s, Psref is
   subjected to a step change from 0 to 2.5 MW. At t = 0.30 s, Psref is subjected
   to another step change from 2.5 to −2.5 MW. At t = 0.35 s, Qsref is subjected
   to a step change from 0 to 1.0 MVAr.
      Figure 8.12 illustrates the time responses of the VSC system to the start-up
   process and the disturbances. Figure 8.12 illustrates that Ps and Qs rapidly track
   Psref and Qsref , respectively. Figure 8.12 also shows that the responses of Ps and
   Qs are decoupled when either of them is changed. Figure 8.12 also illustrates the
   AC system phase-a voltage waveform, that is, Vsa , and the converter phase-a cur-
   rent waveform, that is, ia . Figure 8.12 shows that ia is (i) in phase with Vsa when
   (Ps , Qs ) = (2.5 MW, 0), (ii) 180◦ behind Vsa when (Ps , Qs ) = (−2.5 MW, 0),
   and (iii) 158◦ behind Vsa when (Ps , Qs ) = (−2.5 MW, 1.0 MVAr).
      Figure 8.13 provides a close-up of id and iq around t = 0.20 s. Figure 8.13
   veriﬁes that the step response of id is that of a ﬁrst-order exponential function
   that reaches its ﬁnal value at about t = 0.21 s, that is, after about 10 ms. It should
   be noted that such an inspective veriﬁcation is not readily possible for αβ-frame
   current controllers of Chapter 7. The reason is that compensators in αβ-frame
   are essentially of high dynamic orders, and so are the resultant closed-loop
                        CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                  223

           5000
Ps (kW)

           2500
              0
          −2500
          −5000
  Qs (kVAr)




              1000
               500
                 0



                    10
      Vsa and ia




                     5       20Vsa (kV)
                     0       ia (kA)
                    –5
                   –10
                      0.1        0.15        0.2         0.25        0.3         0.35             0.4
                                                       time (s)

                    FIGURE 8.12 Dynamic responses of real and reactive power; Example 8.2.


        systems. To design αβ-frame compensators, we adopted the frequency response
        method (Bode plots) that usually does not offer a quantitative insight into the
        time-response characteristics of the closed-loop system, unless the closed-loop
        system is predominantly a ﬁrst-order or a second-order system. Figure 8.13 also
        conﬁrms that id and iq are well decoupled; it is observed that iq remains regulated
        at zero while id is changing from zero to 4.26 kA. Ripples on the waveforms
        of id and iq are due to the pulse-width modulation (PWM) switching side-band
        harmonics of VSC AC-side currents, which are modulated by 60 Hz via the
        abc- to dq-frame transformation.


          4260
id (A)




          2000
                                                                                        idref
                                                                                        id
                    0



              400
iq (A)




                   0
                                                                                        iqref
                                                                                        iq
          −400
                   0.195        0.2        0.205        0.21       0.215        0.22            0.225
                                                      time (s)

              FIGURE 8.13 A close-up of responses of id and iq about t = 0.20 s; Example 8.2.
224     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


8.4.2   Selection of DC-Bus Voltage Level
As discussed in Sections 7.3.4, 7.3.5, and 7.3.6, the DC-bus voltage of the real-
/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3 must satisfy the following criteria:
                                        t ,
                                 VDC ≥ 2V        PWM,                           (8.58)

                         t ,
               VDC ≥ 1.74V        PWM with third-harmonic injection.            (8.59)

                                 t under the worst-case operating condition. Since
Thus, one must properly evaluate V
the VSC system controls Ps and Qs , V t should also be expressed in terms of Ps
and Qs . Based on (8.45) and (8.46), and under the assumptions that Vsq = 0 and
(R + ron ) ≈ 0, we deduce

                                     did
                             Vtd = L     − Lω0 iq + Vsd ,                       (8.60)
                                      dt
                                     diq
                             Vtq = L     + Lω0 id.                              (8.61)
                                     dt

Substituting for id and iq from (8.41) and (8.42) in (8.60) and (8.61), and assuming
that Vsd is constant, we obtain
                                               
                              2L dPs         2Lω0
                     Vtd =               +           Qs + Vsd ,                 (8.62)
                             3Vsd    dt      3Vsd
                                                  
                                2L dQs          2Lω0
                     Vtq = −               +           Ps .                     (8.63)
                               3Vsd     dt      3Vsd

Based on (4.77), the amplitude of the AC-side terminal voltage is
                                         /
                                  t =
                                  V       Vtd2 + Vtq2 .                         (8.64)

Furthermore, the amplitude of the modulating signal is

                                     t = m VDC
                                     V         .                               (8.65)
                                             2

As discussed in Section 7.3.6, if the conventional PWM is employed, m    can assume
a value up to unity, whereas with the PWM with third-harmonic injection, m    can be
as large as 1.15.
    To calculate the maximum of V t , consider the following worst-case scenario. Ini-
tially, the system is under a steady-state condition, that is, Ps = Psref = Ps0 and
Qs = Qsref = Qs0 . At t = t0 , Psref and Qsref are subjected to step changes from Ps0
to Ps0 + Ps , and Qs0 to Qs0 + Qs , respectively. As discussed in Section 8.4.1,
           CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                           225

Ps and Qs respond to step changes in their corresponding reference commands as

                         Ps (t) = (Ps0 +     Ps ) −     Ps e−(t−t0 )/τi ,                 (8.66)
                         Qs (t) = (Qs0 +       Qs ) −     Qs e−(t−t0 )/τi ,               (8.67)

for t ≥ t0 . Substituting for Ps (t) and Qs (t) in (8.62) and (8.63), from (8.66) and (8.67),
we deduce
                            
                      2Lω0
     Vtd = Vsd +               (Qs0 + Qs )
                       3Vsd
                                         
                 2Lω0          Ps
             +                      − Qs e−(t−t0 )/τi ,                                (8.68)
                  3Vsd       ω0 τi
                                                                  
               2Lω0                         2Lω0           Qs
     Vtq =              (Ps0 + Ps ) −                          + Ps e−(t−t0 )/τi . (8.69)
               3Vsd                          3Vsd        ω0 τi

Equation (8.68) indicates that at t = t0 , Vtd jumps from the initial value of Vsd +
( 2Lω                 2Lω0
  3Vsd )Qs0 to Vsd + ( 3Vsd )Qs0 + ( 3τi Vsd ) Ps and then exponentially approaches the
      0                                2L

ﬁnal value of Vsd + ( 2Lω
                      3Vsd )(Qs0 +
                          0
                                       Qs ). Equation (8.69) indicates that Vtq jumps
                           2Lω0
from the initial value of ( 3Vsd )Ps0 to ( 2Lω
                                           3Vsd )Ps0 − ( 3τi Vsd ) Qs at t = t0 and then
                                               0            2L

exponentially approaches the ﬁnal value of ( 2Lω 3Vsd )(Ps0 + Ps ). The worst-case sce-
                                                     0

nario corresponds to t = t0+ (immediately after t = t0 ) where the jumps in both Ps
and Qs coincide, and
                                                             
                                      2Lω0                2L
                   Vtd (t0+ ) = Vsd +         Qs0 +               Ps ,                    (8.70)
                                       3Vsd             3τi Vsd
                                                     
                         +       2Lω0            2L
                   Vtq (t0 ) =          Ps0 −                Qs .                         (8.71)
                                 3Vsd           3τi Vsd

Depending on the steady-state power ﬂow and the values of Ps and Qs , Vtd (t0+ )
and Vtq (t0+ ) can be estimated based on (8.70) and (8.71). The maximum AC-side
terminal voltage, Vt (t + ), is then calculated from (8.64), based on Vtd (t + ) and Vtq (t + ).
                        0                                                    0              0
Finally, the minimum required DC-bus voltage is calculated based on (8.58) or (8.59),
depending on the PWM strategy adopted. These calculations are demonstrated in
Example 8.3.

   EXAMPLE 8.3            Selection of DC-Bus Voltage Level
   Consider the real-/reactive-power controller of Example 8.2, in which Vsd =
   0.391 kV, L = 100 ␮H, τi = 2.0 ms, and VDC = 1.250 kV. Assume that for
   this system the worst-case scenario corresponds to Ps0 = 0, Ps = 2.5 MW,
   Qs0 = 0, and Qs = 0. Thus, based on (8.70), (8.71), and (8.64), Vtd (t0+ ) =
                                 t (t + ) = 0.604 kV. If the conventional sinusoidal
   0.604 kV, Vtq (t0+ ) = 0, and V    0
226        GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


            1
 mdq


        0.625
                                                                                   md
                                                                                   mq
            0


        0.965
 m̂




        0.685
        0.625



        0.965
mabc




            0                                                                      ma
                                                                                   mb
                                                                                   mc
       −0.965
           0.195         0.2        0.205         0.21       0.215        0.22       0.225
                                                time (s)

FIGURE 8.14 Steady-state and dynamic responses of the modulating signals to step change
in Psref ; Example 8.3.



       PWM is employed, VDC must be larger than 1.208 kV (equation (8.58)) to avoid
       overmodulation. However, if the third-harmonic injected PWM is employed,
       VDC can be lowered to about 1.050 kV (equation (8.59)). For the VSC system
       of Example 8.2, VDC = 1.250 kV was selected since the conventional PWM
       was employed.
                                                                  for the VSC system
          Figure 8.14 illustrates the waveforms of md , mq , and m
       of Example 8.2. Figure 8.14 illustrates that at t0 = 0.2 s, m jumps to 0.965,
       corresponding to V t = 0.604 kV. Figure 8.14 also indicates that in this speciﬁc
       example, the instant when the disturbance takes place coincides with the in-
       stant when mb (t) reaches its negative peak; this corresponds to the worst-case
       scenario. However, since the DC-bus voltage is adequately large, neither m   nor
       |mb (t0 )| exceed unity, and the VSC does not experience overmodulation.


8.4.3      AC-Side Equivalent Circuit
Traditionally, balanced three-phase linear circuits have been analyzed based on their
corresponding phasor diagrams and single-phase equivalent circuits. In the conven-
tional phasor analysis, which is restricted to steady-state conditions, the voltages
and currents are represented by phasors, and the passive elements are represented
by impedances. This section ﬁrst presents a space-phasor diagram, analogous to
the conventional phasor diagram, for the AC side of the real-/reactive-power con-
troller of Figure 8.3. Then, the relationships between the magnitude/phase-angle of
an AC-side variable and the d-/q-axis components of the variable are identiﬁed. It is
also demonstrated that, under steady-state conditions, the space-phasor differential
equations of the real-/reactive-power controller become equivalent to the algebraic
          CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                    227

equations derived based on the conventional phasor-domain analysis. Finally, based
on the steady-state phasor model, a simpliﬁed equivalent circuit is presented for the
real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3.

8.4.3.1 Space-Phasor Diagram of the AC Side With reference to the real-
/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3, Vsabc , Vtabc , and iabc are

                                        s cos (θ) ,
                              Vsa (t) = V
                                                       
                                                    2π
                              Vsb (t) = Vs cos θ −        ,
                                                      3
                                                       
                                        s cos θ − 4π ,
                              Vsc (t) = V                                         (8.72)
                                                      3


                                      t cos (θ + δ) ,
                            Vta (t) = V
                                                         
                                                      2π
                            Vtb (t) = Vt cos θ + δ −        ,
                                                        3
                                                         
                                                      4π
                            Vtc (t) = Vt cos θ + δ −        ,                     (8.73)
                                                        3


                      ia (t) = i cos (θ − φ) ,
                                                  
                                                2π
                      ib (t) = i cos θ − φ −        ,
                                                 3
                                                  
                                               4π
                      ic (t) = i cos θ − φ −         ,                            (8.74)
                                                 3

where θ = ω0 t + θ0 , and δ and −φ are the phase shifts of Vtabc and iabc with respect
to Vsabc , respectively. Vsabc , Vtabc , and iabc are equivalently expressed by the space
phasors

                            →  jθ
                            −
                            Vs = Vs e ,                                           (8.75)
                            → #  jδ $ jθ
                            −
                            Vt = Vt e e ,                                         (8.76)
                            → # −jφ $ jθ
                            −
                             i = ie     e .                                       (8.77)

                   →
                   −        →
                            −                                    →
                                                                 −
The space phasors Vt and i are phase shifted with respect to Vs by angles δ and
−φ, respectively. Under transient conditions, in addition to δ and φ, the magnitudes
   →
   −      →
          −        t and i) can also change with time. In a steady state, however,
of Vt and i (i.e., V
228     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


                             b

                    q                                        Vt




                                                      d
                                                                  Vs
                                                e                      d
                                           g
                                                          q j r
                                                i            z
                                                                           a

FIGURE 8.15 Space-phasor diagram for AC side of real-/reactive-power controller of
Figure 8.3.


      t , and i are constant values, and −
δ, φ, V
                                              → −  →         →
                                                             −
                                              Vs , Vt , and i assume constant lengths and
rotate with the constant angular frequency ω0 .
                                                 →−
                                                 −   →         →
                                                               −
   Figure 8.15 illustrates the space phasors Vs , Vt , and i on the αβ-plane. Figure 8.15
also shows a dq-frame whose d-axis makes an angle ρ with respect to the α-axis. The d
or q component of each space phasor is the projection of the space phasor on the corre-
sponding axis. Therefore, if dρ/dt = ω0 , that is, the dq-frame rotates with the angular
speed ω0 , then Vsdq , Vtdq , and idq settle at constant values in steady state. As discussed
earlier in this chapter, the PLL not only guarantees dρ/dt = ω0 but also ensures that
ρ = θ; the latter implies that Vsq = 0 and Vsd = V       s , as perceived from Figure 8.15.
   To relate the lengths and phase angles of the space phasors to their d- and q-axis
components, we use the space-phasor to dq-frame transformation of (8.1), with ρ = θ.
This yields

                          s ,
             Vsd + jVsq = V                                                           (8.78)
                                      #         $      #  $
             Vtd + jVtq = V          t cos δ + j V
                            t ejδ = V            t sin δ ,                          (8.79)
                                   #     $    #        $
             id + jiq = ie−jφ = i cos φ + j −i sin φ .                             (8.80)

It follows from (8.79) and (8.80) that
                                     0        1
                            δ = tan−1 Vtq /Vtd ,                                      (8.81)
                                       0       1
                            φ = − tan−1 iq /id .                                      (8.82)

              →
              −       →
                      −
The angles of Vt and i with respect to the α-axis are identiﬁed as ε and ζ, respectively.
Figure 8.15 illustrates that ε = θ + δ and ζ = θ − φ. Thus,
         CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                   229

                                     0         1
                        ε = θ + tan−1 Vtq /Vtd ,                                (8.83)
                                     0      1
                        ζ = θ + tan−1 iq /id .                                  (8.84)

                                                      →
                                                      −                 →
                                                                        −
Figure 8.15 also shows that γ = ε − ζ is the angle of Vt with respect to i , that is,
γ is the power-factor angle of the three-phase circuit seen from the VSC AC-side
terminals. Based on (8.83) and (8.84), we deduce
                           0        1       0       1
                  γ = tan−1 Vtq /Vtd − tan−1 iq / id .                          (8.85)

8.4.3.2 AC-Side Steady-State Equivalent Circuit The AC-side dynamics of the
real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3 are described by (8.8). If the PLL is
under a steady-state condition, then ρ = ω0 t + θ0 and (8.8) can be rewritten as

                                    d       -                 .
                  Vtdq − Vsdq − L      idq = jLω0 + (R + ron ) idq ,            (8.86)
                                    dt

where fdq = fd + jfq and ω0 = dρ/dt. In a steady state, the time derivative is zero
and we obtain
                                -                 .
                   Vtdq − Vsdq = jLω0 + (R + ron ) idq = Zidq ,                 (8.87)
                                                
                                             Z


which is identical to the conventional phasor-domain equation for an equivalent single-
phase circuit. Although (8.87) is valid under steady-state conditions, it may also be
employed for analysis and control design purposes, if a quasi-steady-state condition
is assumed. In this case, id and iq are not constant quantities, but change relatively
slowly with time. Therefore, did /dt and diq /dt are insigniﬁcant and can be ignored
in the analysis.
    Figure 8.16(a) illustrates a time-domain equivalent circuit for the AC side of the
real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3. Based on (8.86), the circuit of Figure
8.16(a) can be represented by the space-phasor-domain equivalent circuit of Figure
8.16(b). In the circuit of Figure 8.16(b), all the time-domain variables of the origi-
nal circuit are represented by the corresponding space phasors. Thus, the equivalent
circuit is valid under both dynamic and steady-state operating conditions. If a quasi-
steady-state condition is assumed, based on (8.87) the circuit of Figure 8.16(a) can
be represented by the steady-state phasor-domain circuit of Figure 8.16(c).
                     →
                     −       →
                             −
    Substituting for Vs and i , from (8.75) and (8.77), in (4.40), we deduce

                                       3
                                   Ps =  Vs i cos φ,                            (8.88)
                                       2
                                       3
                                   Qs = V  s i sin φ.                           (8.89)
                                       2
230     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME



                                                    Ps
                                                    Qs
                       Vta         R+ron L
                                                             Vsa
                                                      ia
                          +                                   +
                       Vtb         R+ron L                   Vsb
                                                      ib
                          +                                   +
                       Vtc         R+ron L            ic      Vsc
                         +                                    +
                                            (a)

                                                   Ps + jQs
                Vtejδ Ld(ie–jϕ)/dt                                   Vsej0
                   +           +
                                                        ie–jϕ         +
                                      R+ron jLω 0

                                            Z

                                            (b)



                                            Ps + jQs

                       Vtejδ R+r          jLω0                Vsej0
                                    on            ie–jϕ
                          +                                    +
                                      Z
                                            (c)
FIGURE 8.16 Equivalent circuits for AC side of the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure
8.3: (a) time-domain equivalent circuit; (b) dynamic space-phasor-domain equivalent circuit;
(c) quasi-steady-state space-phasor-domain equivalent circuit.
         CURRENT-MODE CONTROL OF REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER                   231

Equations (8.88) and (8.89) exhibit the same forms as their counterparts in the con-
ventional phasor-domain analysis. However, they are also valid for dynamic operating
regimes where Vs , i, and φ can all be functions of time.


8.4.4   PWM with Third-Harmonic Injection
In Section 7.3.6, we explained the need for the third-harmonic injected PWM as a
means for extending the VSC permissible voltage range. We then formulated the
third-harmonic injected PWM and presented the block diagram of Figure 7.11 for its
implementation in αβ-frame. Figure 8.17 shows a block diagram equivalent to that of
Figure 7.11, for the third-harmonic injected PWM in dq-frame.
   As explained in Section 7.3.6, the modulating signals for the third-harmonic in-
jected PWM are constructed by mabc , based on (7.61)–(7.63). Thus, as shown in
Figure 8.17, we obtain mabc from the dq- to abc-frame transformation of md and mq .
The third-harmonic injected PWM also requires m    2 , as indicated
                                                            /        by (7.61)–(7.63).
                       2 in terms of md and mq as m
Therefore, we express m                             = m2d + m2q (Fig. 8.17).
  Figure 8.18 shows a schematic diagram of a real-/reactive-power controller that
employs the third-harmonic injected PWM. The real-/reactive-power controller of



           dq- to abc-frame transformer for third-harmonic injection
                                                 Equation (7.61)
                                   ma                                         maug-a
                       dq                                3/2
                                                                      –
                                                 (·)3           2/3

                                                 Equation (7.62)
                                   mb                                         maug-b
                                                         3/2
                                                                      –
  ρ                                              (·)3           2/3

                                                 Equation (7.63)
                                   mc
                             abc                         3/2                  maug-c
                                                                      –
                                                 (·)3           2/3
 md                   (·)2
                                   ˆ2
                                   m

 mq                   (·)2


FIGURE 8.17 Block diagram of dq- to abc-frame signal transformer to generate modulating
signals for third-harmonic injected PWM.
232       GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


                                                                                                   PCC
                                             VSC system                                                        AC
                                   “real-/reactive-power controller”                                         system
                                                                                                Qs
                 is                iDC
                                                                                                Ps
                         +
                                                                      Vta       ia R+ron L               Vsa
                                                                                                         +
                                              Averaged                Vtb       ib R+ron L               Vsb
V DC +          iloss   V DC       C         ideal three-                                                +     Vnull
                                             phase VSC                Vtc       ic R+ron L               Vsc
                                                                                                         +




                               maug-abc Saturation at ± 1
                                                               ρ        dq
                                                                              abc
                                                                                               PLL
                                                                                     Vsd
                               ρ       Third-harmonic injected PWM
                                                                                                     ρ
                                        signal generator (Fig 8.17)                  Vsq
         V DC                                   md mq                 id iq
                                                                                     idref
                             Compensators in dq-frame                                iqref
                                                                                             Reference
                                                                                              signal
                                                                                                          Psref
                                                                                             generator    Qsref
FIGURE 8.18 Schematic diagram of real-/reactive-power controller utilizing the third-
harmonic injected PWM.



Figure 8.18 is the same as the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.3 in which
the mdq -to-mabc block is replaced by the block diagram of Figure 8.17. The VSC
employed in the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.18 can be a two-level
VSC or a three-level NPC. Figure 8.18 also illustrates that for the VSC system with
the third-harmonic injected PWM, maug-abc is limited to ±1, which corresponds to
the limit of ±1.15 for mabc . Thus, using the third-harmonic injected PWM, the VSC
AC-side terminal voltage can reach up to ±1.15(VDC /2), instead of ±(VDC /2) under
the conventional PWM.



8.5 REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER BASED ON
THREE-LEVEL NPC

The real-/reactive-power controllers of Figures 8.3 and 8.18 can also utilize the three-
level NPC (Fig. 8.19) as the power processor. Based on the uniﬁed dynamic model of
Section 6.7.4 presented for the two-level VSC and the three-level NPC, the dq-frame
model and control design procedures presented in Sections 8.3 and 8.4 are equally
applicable to both the two-level VSC and the three-level NPC. However, as shown in
Figure 8.19, the three-level NPC also requires a DC-side voltage equalizing scheme,
as discussed in Section 6.7.2.
          REAL-/REACTIVE-POWER CONTROLLER BASED ON THREE-LEVEL NPC                              233


                             is                ip


                                   2C                           V1
                                                                                            Vta ia
                                              inp                      Three-level NPC      Vtb ib
 Effective capacitance: C   V DC     0                                    Figure 6.6
                                                                                            Vtc ic
                                                                V2
                                   2C

                                               in

                                                                           4 4 4
                                                                           PWM generator
                                                                            3x Figure 6.3




                                         DC-side voltage balancer     m0
                                         Figure 6.17 or Figure 8.20




                                                                            ma mb mc
                  FIGURE 8.19 Block diagram of the three-level NPC.

   Figure 8.20 illustrates a control block diagram of the DC-side voltage equalizing
scheme. Figure 8.20 indicates that the control plant is an integrator whose gain is
proportional to −Ps , that is, the real power that the VSC system exchanges with the
AC system. Thus, the output of the compensator K(s) is multiplied by −1 if Ps is




FIGURE 8.20 Control block diagram of the partial DC-side voltage equalizing scheme for
the three-level NPC.
234     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


positive, to ensure a negative feedback irrespective of the direction of the power ﬂow.
Ps can be readily calculated using Ps = (3/2)Vsd id or, assuming a fast d-axis current
controller, approximated by Psref . Figure 8.20 also shows that the difference between
the partial DC-side voltages is fed back through a ﬁlter, F (s). The ﬁlter is required to
attenuate the third-order harmonic component of the measured signal and prevent it
from distorting the corrective offset m0 . Details of modeling, derivation of the block
diagram of Figure 8.20, and the compensator design approach for the DC-side voltage
equalizing scheme are given in Section 7.4.



8.6   CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT

Previous sections presented the model and controls of the real-/reactive-power con-
troller (Figs. 8.3 and 8.18), whose function is to control the real and reactive power
that is exchanged with the AC system. In the real-/reactive-power controller, the VSC
DC-bus voltage is impressed by an ideal, DC, voltage source, and the VSC system
acts as a bidirectional energy exchanger between the AC system and the DC voltage
source. However, in many applications, for example, photovoltaic (PV) systems and
fuel-cell systems, the VSC DC side is not interfaced with a voltage source; rather, it
is connected to a (DC) power source that needs to be interfaced and exchange (real)
power with the AC system. Thus, the DC-bus voltage is not imposed and, therefore,
needs to be regulated. This scenario is illustrated in Figure 8.21.
    The VSC system of Figure 8.21 is conceptually the same as that of Figure 8.18,
except that the DC voltage source is replaced by a (variable) DC power source. The
power source typically represents a power-electronic unit (or a cluster of them) with
a prime source of energy, for example, a PV array, a variable-speed wind turbine-
generator set, a fuel-cell unit, or a gas turbine-generator set, behind it, and is considered
as a black box in our investigations. The power source is assumed to exchange a time-
varying power, Pext (t), with the VSC DC side. Thus, the VSC system of Figure 8.21
enables a bidirectional power exchange between the power source (black box) and
the AC system. We refer to the VSC system of Figure 8.21 as controlled DC-voltage
power port, which is employed as an integral part of the STATCOM, the back-to-back
HVDC converter system, and variable-speed wind-power units; these are discussed
in Chapters 11, 12, and 13, respectively.
    The main control objective for the controlled DC-voltage power port is to regulate
the DC-bus voltage VDC . As Figure 8.21 illustrates, the kernel of the controlled DC-
voltage power port is the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.18 by which Ps
and Qs can be independently controlled. Therefore, to regulate the DC-bus voltage,
a feedback mechanism compares VDC with its reference command and accordingly
adjusts Ps , such that the net power exchanged with the DC-bus capacitor is kept
at zero. However, the reactive power Qs can be independently controlled. In many
applications, Qs is regulated at zero, that is, the VSC system operates at unity power
factor. Alternatively, Qs may be controlled in a closed-loop mechanism to regulate
the PCC voltage, as discussed in Chapter 11.
                                                     CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT                                      235


                                               VSC system                                                            AC
                                   “controlled DC-voltage power port”                                              system
     Pext                         PDC                  Pt                                                  PCC
                                                                                                        Qs
                  iext              iDC
              +                                                                                          Ps
                                                                        Vta          ia R+ron L                    Vsa
                                                                                                                   +
                                                    Averaged            Vtb          ib R+ron L                    Vsb
 Power                   iloss                                                                                     +
 source
            V DC                        C          ideal three-                                                           Vnull
                                                   phase VSC            Vtc          ic R+ron L                    Vsc
                                                                                                                   +




 Real- and reactive-               maug-abc Saturation at ± 1       ρ               abc                 PLL
                                                                             dq
  power controllers
                                                                                              Vsd
                                    ρ        Third-harmonic injected PWM
                                              signal generator (Fig 8.17)                     Vsq              ρ
               V DC                                   md mq                 id iq
                                                                                              idref
                                                                                              iqref
                                                                                                      Reference        Qsref
                                 Compensators in dq-frame                                              signal
                                                                                                      generator        Psref
                                                                               Pext
                                                          Compensator                     Saturation
                  V DC                  eV                                                             Psref
                         (·)2 –                 –1             KV (s)

          V DCref                             DC-bus voltage controller with feedforward
                         (·)2

        FIGURE 8.21 Schematic diagram of the controlled DC-voltage power-port.


8.6.1     Model of Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port
The main control requirement of the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 8.21
is to regulate the DC-bus voltage, VDC . Equivalently, as discussed in Section 7.5.1,
                        2 rather than V
we choose to regulate VDC                                                     2
                                         DC . Based on (7.92), dynamics of VDC are
described by
                                           %                                                           &
                    2
                  dVDC  2        2       2                                          2LPs        dPs
                       = Pext − Ploss −      Ps +                                     2
                   dt   C        C      C                                           3Vsd         dt
                            %              &
                          2    2LQs dQs
                        +          2
                                             ,                                                                           (8.90)
                          C     3Vsd   dt

where V s of (7.92) is replaced by Vsd . Based on the uniﬁed dynamic model of the
two-level VSC and the three-level NPC that was presented in Section 6.7.4, (8.90)
is valid for both VSC conﬁgurations. Based on (8.90), VDC  2 is the output, P is the
                                                                             s
236     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


control input, and Pext , Ploss , and Qs are the disturbance inputs. As shown in Figure
8.21, VDC2 is compared with V 2
                                  DCref , the error signal is processed by the compensator
Kv (s), and the command Psref is issued for the real-power controller. The real-power
controller, in turn, regulates Ps at Psref , while Qs can be independently controlled.
Qsref can be set to a nonzero value if an exchange of reactive power with the AC
system is required. In an AC system with a large impedance, the PCC voltage is
subject to variations as Ps changes with time (i.e., due to the changes of Pext ). In this
case, the PCC voltage can be regulated by controlling Qs in a closed-loop system
that feeds the PCC voltage back and commands Qsref ; this reactive-power control
strategy is discussed in Chapter 11.
   To derive the transfer function Gp (s) = Ps (s)/Psref (s), we note that

                                  Id (s) = Gi (s)Idref (s),                        (8.91)

where Gi (s) is given by (8.55). Assuming that Vsd is constant, multiplying both sides
of (8.91) by (3/2)Vsd , we obtain

                                 Ps (s) = Gi (s)Psref (s).                         (8.92)

Therefore, Gp (s) = Gi (s) and based on (8.55), we have

                               Ps (s)                  1
                                        = Gp (s) =          .                      (8.93)
                              Psref (s)            τi s + 1

The form of (8.93) is intuitively expected as real power in dq-frame is proportional to
                                                                            dQs
id . The control plant described by (8.90) is nonlinear due to Ps dP s
                                                                   dt and Qs dt terms.
The linearized plant is provided by (7.94), which is repeated here as (8.94), in which
s is substituted by Vsd .
V

                                     %                                 &
                       2
                    d VDC  2       2           2LPs0            d Ps
                          = Pext −     Ps +         2
                      dt   C       C            3Vsd             dt
                               %                 &
                             2    2LQs0 d Qs
                           +         2
                                                   ,                               (8.94)
                             C     3Vsd     dt

where superscripts ∼ and 0 represent, respectively, small-signal perturbations and
steady-state values of the variables. Applying Laplace transform to (8.94), we deduce
the transfer function Gv (s) = VDC2 /P as
                                       s

                                                       
                                                       2 τs + 1
                       Gv (s) = VDC
                                 2
                                    (s)/Ps (s) = −              ,                  (8.95)
                                                       C    s
                                              CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT                      237

where the time constant τ is

                                         2LPs0   2LPext0
                                    τ=      2
                                               =    2
                                                         .                                        (8.96)
                                          3Vsd    3Vsd

   Equation (8.96) indicates that τ is proportional to the (steady-state) real-power ﬂow
Pext0 (or Ps0 ). Thus, if Pext0 is small, τ is insigniﬁcant and the plant is predominantly
an integrator. As Pext increases, τ becomes larger and causes a shift in the phase of
Gv (s). In the inverting mode of operation where Pext0 is positive, τ is also positive
and adds to the phase of Gv (s). However, in the rectifying mode of operation, that is,
where Pext0 is negative, τ is negative and results in reduction in the phase of Gv (s); the
phase drops further as the absolute value of Pext0 becomes larger. Based on (8.95),
the plant zero is given by z = −1/τ. Therefore, a negative τ corresponds to a zero on
the right-half plane (RHP). Consequently, the controlled DC-voltage power port is a
non-minimum-phase system in the rectifying mode of operation [72]. As discussed
in Section 8.6.3, this non-minimum-phase property has a detrimental impact on the
system stability and must be accounted for in the control design process [72].


8.6.2     Control of Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port
Figure 8.22 shows a block diagram of the DC-bus voltage controller for the controlled
DC-voltage power port of Figure 8.21. The closed-loop system is composed of the
compensator Kv (s), real-power controller Gp (s), and control plant Gv (s), which is
described by (8.95). Figures 8.21 and 8.22 indicate that Kv (s) is multiplied by −1 to
compensate for the negative sign of Gv (s). The closed-loop system of Figure 8.22 is
identical to that of Figure 7.23 for which the design guidelines have been provided
in Section 7.5.2 and are, therefore, equally applicable to the closed-loop system of
Figure 8.22. As described in Section 7.5.2, Kv (s) should include an integral term and
a lead transfer function. The lead transfer function compensates for the plant phase
lag and ensures an adequate phase margin at the gain crossover frequency. Based on
(8.95) and (8.96), Gv (s) has the largest phase lag when Pext is at its rated negative
value. If an adequate phase margin can be guaranteed at this operating point, the
closed-loop system remains stable for other operating points.



        DC-bus voltage controller                 Composite control plant
                                              Power controller          DC-bus voltage dynamics
                    Compensator                 dynamics
                                    P˜ sref                      P˜ s
 0
            e˜ V
            –      − KV (s)                      Gp (s)                     −   (2) τs +s 1
                                                                                 C
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                  V˜ DC


FIGURE 8.22 Control block diagram of DC-bus voltage controller based on the linearized
model.
238     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


    As outlined in Section 7.5.2, to design Kv (s), we ﬁrst select the gain crossover,
ωc , to be adequately smaller than the bandwidth of Gp (s), such that one can assume
Gp (jωc ) ≈ 1 + j0. Then, Kv (s) is designed for an adequately large phase margin
under the worst-case operating condition. The design method presented in Section
7.5.2 was based on frequency response. The reason was that based on the αβ-frame
control Gp (s) typically is a high-order transfer function and primarily characterized by
its bandwidth rather than its pole/zero map. Here, however, Gp (s) (as given by (8.93))
is a ﬁrst-order transfer function and the root-locus design method is also an option.
The advantage of the root-locus method is that performance indices, for example,
maximum overshoot and settling time, are related to the pole/zero loci in a more
straightforward manner and can be readily taken into account in the design process.


   EXAMPLE 8.4          Design of DC-Bus Voltage Controller in dq-Frame
   Consider the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 8.21 that employs the
   three-level NPC of Figure 8.19. Parameters of the system are 2C = 19,250 ␮F,
   L = 200 ␮H, R = 2.38 m, ron = 0.88 m, Vd = 1.0 V, VDC = 2500 V, fs =
   1680 Hz, Vsd = 391 V, and ω0 = 377 rad/s. The rated power of the VSC system
   is Ps = ±2.5 MW, and the third-harmonic injected PWM strategy is adopted.
      With reference to Figure 8.20, the controllers of the DC-side voltage equal-
   izing scheme are


                     K(s) = 0.0007      [V −1 ],
                               s2 + (3ω0 )2       s2 + 11312
                     F (s) =                =                    .
                                (s + 3ω0 )2   s2 + 2262s + 11312

   From (8.56) and (8.57), for τi = 1.0 ms parameters of the dq-frame current
   controllers must be kp = 0.2  and ki = 3.26 /s, which correspond to

                                                     1000
                               Gp (s) = Gi (s) =            .                     (8.97)
                                                   s + 1000

   The DC-bus voltage controller is designed based on the block diagram of Figure
   8.22. In Figure 8.22, Gv (s) is a function of the operating point (see equations
   (8.95) and (8.96)). Therefore, Kv (s) is designed for the worst-case operating
   point in the rectiﬁcation mode, corresponding to Pext0 = −2.5 MW. Equation
   (8.97) indicates that the bandwidth of Gp (s) is 1000 rad/s. Thus, for the control
   loop of Figure 8.22, we choose ωc to be about one-ﬁfth of the bandwidth of
   Gp (s), that is, 200 rad/s, to avoid excessive phase lag in the loop.
      Based on Figure 8.22, the loop gain is


                               (s) = −Kv (s)Gp (s)Gv (s),                        (8.98)
                                    CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT               239

where Gv (s) and Gp (s) are given by (8.95) and (8.97), respectively. To ensure
zero steady-state errors, Kv (s) must include an integral term. Let Kv (s) be

                                                   k0
                                 Kv (s) = N(s)        ,                         (8.99)
                                                    s

where N(s) is a proper transfer function with no zero at s = 0, and k0 is a
constant gain. Substituting for Gv (s) and Kv (s) in (8.98), respectively, from
(8.95) and (8.99), we obtain
                                       
                                       2      τs + 1
                      (s) = N(s)k0                      .                     (8.100)
                                       C s2 (0.001s + 1)

If N(s) = 1, then k0 = 180 yields |(j200)| = 1 and

                                          τs + 1
                          (s) = 37423 2             .                         (8.101)
                                      s (0.001s + 1)

We refer to (8.101) as the uncompensated loop gain.
   Figure 8.23 illustrates the magnitude and phase plots of the uncompensated
loop gain, for Pext0 = 2.5 MW, Pext0 = 0, and Pext0 = −2.5 MW. Figure 8.23
shows that the magnitude response of the uncompensated loop gain is similar
for all three operating points, and |(j200)| = 1. However, ∠(j200) is −168◦ ,
−191◦ , and −215◦ , corresponding to Pext0 = 2.5, 0, and −2.5 MW, respec-
tively. Therefore, the closed-loop system is poorly stable for Pext0 = 2.5 MW,
and unstable for Pext0 = 0 and Pext0 = −2.5 MW. To ensure a stable closed-
loop system for all operating points, we correct ∠(j200) by letting N(s) in
(8.100) be the lead ﬁlter

                                              s + (p/α)
                               N(s) = n0                ,                      (8.102)
                                                s + p1

where p is the ﬁlter pole, α (> 1) is a real constant, and n0 is the ﬁlter gain. The
maximum phase of the ﬁlter is given by
                                                       
                                         −1       α−1
                              δm = sin                      ,                  (8.103)
                                                  α+1

which corresponds to the frequency

                                         p
                                    ωm = √ .                                   (8.104)
                                          α

Thus, if a phase margin of, for example, 45◦ is desired for Pext = −2.5 MW,
then ∠N(j200) is required to be 80◦ . Solving for α, p, and n0 , with δm = 80◦ ,
240                        GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME
        Magnitude (dB)
                          100 positive-rated real power
                                                                           uncompensated
                           50
                                                                           compensated
                            0
                          −50
                         −100


                            0
        Phase (deg)




                                                                           uncompensated
                          –60                                              compensated
                         –120
                         –180
                         –240 positive-rated real power
                            101               102           103          104           105
                                                          ω (rad/s)
 Magnitude (dB)




                          100 zero real power
                                                                           uncompensated
                           50
                                                                           compensated
                            0
                          −50
                         −100


                          –60
 Phase (deg)




                                                                           uncompensated
                         –120                                              compensated
                         –180
                         –240
                         –300 zero real power
                            101              102            103          104           105
                                                          ω (rad/s)
  Magnitude (dB)




                          100 negative-rated real power
                                                                           uncompensated
                           50
                                                                           compensated
                            0
                          −50
                         −100


                         –120
  Phase (deg)




                                                                           uncompensated
                         –180                                              compensated
                         –240
                         –300
                         –360 negative-rated real power
                            101               102           103          104           105
                                                          ω (rad/s)
FIGURE 8.23 Bode plot of the open-loop gain of the DC-bus voltage controller; Example
8.4.
                                                 CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT                  241

     ωm = 200 rad/s, and |N(j200)| = 1, we obtain

                                                             s + 19
                                      N(s) = 10.38                   .                          (8.105)
                                                            s + 2077

     Substituting for N(s) in (8.99) and (8.100), from (8.105), we obtain
                                                                               
                                                 s + 19              τs + 1
                           (s) = 388455                                              ,         (8.106)
                                                s + 2077        s2 (0.001s + 1)
                                               s + 19
                           Kv (s) = 1868                       [−1 ].                          (8.107)
                                           s (s + 2077)

     We refer to the loop gain of (8.106) as the compensated loop gain. Figure 8.23
     also shows the magnitude and phase plots of the compensated loop gain, for
     Pext0 = 2.5, 0, and −2.5 MW. Figure 8.23 illustrates that |(j200)| = 1 for
     all three operating points. Moreover, ∠(j200) is −89◦ , −112◦ , and −135◦ ,
     corresponding to Pext0 = 2.5, 0, and −2.5 MW, respectively. Thus, the closed-
     loop system is stable for the three operating points with a phase margin ranging
     from 45◦ to 91◦ .
         Figure 8.24 illustrates the response of the controlled DC-voltage power port
     of Figure 8.21 to the start-up process as well as stepwise changes in Pext . The
 Pext (kW)




                2500
                   0
               −2500
 Psref (kW)




                2500
                   0
               –2500


                2500
 Ps (kW)




                   0
               –2500

                1500
   Qs (kVAr)




                1000
                 500
                   0
                –500
                3750
     V DC (V)




                2500
                1250
                   0
                       0    0.1       0.2           0.3              0.4   0.5            0.6     0.7
                                                          time (s)

FIGURE 8.24 Dynamic performance of the controlled DC-voltage power port of Example
8.4 when feed-forward compensation is not in service.
242     GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


   results of Figure 8.24 are obtained under the condition that the feed-forward
   compensation in the DC-bus voltage control loop is disabled, and the VSC
   system is subjected to the following sequence of events.
       Initially, Pext = 0, the VSC gating signals are blocked, and the controllers
   are inactive. However, the DC-side capacitors of the VSC are charged via
   antiparallel diodes of VSC switch cells, and VDC increases to about 700 V.
   At t = 0.20 s, gating signals are unblocked, all controllers are activated, and
   VDCref is changed stepwise from 700 to 2500 V. Consequently, to move VDC
   up, Kv (s) commands a negative Psref to import real power from the AC system
   to the VSC DC side; Psref is saturated to its negative limit for a brief period.
   At about t = 0.30 s, VDC is regulated at VDCref = 2500 V, and Psref and Ps
   assume small values corresponding to the VSC power loss. Figure 8.24 also
   shows that Pext changes stepwise from 0 to 2.5 MW, at t = 0.35 s, which entails
   an overshoot in VDC . The compensator reacts to this disturbance and increases
   Psref (and thus Ps increases) to bring VDC back to 2500 V. At t = 0.50 s, Pext
   changes stepwise from 2.5 to −2.5 MW. Consequently, VDC undergoes an
   undershoot until the compensator reacts and reduces Psref . It should be noted
   that the pattern of the undershoot at t = 0.50 s is different from that of the
   overshoot at t = 0.35 s. The reason is that, as Figure 8.23 illustrates, the phase
   margin (and frequency response) is considerably different for these two op-
   erating points. Therefore, the system response to disturbances is also different
   for the two operating points. At t = 0.65 s, Qsref assumes a step change from 0
   to 1.0 MVAr. This disturbance, however, has no signiﬁcant impact on VDC , as
   Figure 8.24 illustrates. The reason is that, based on (8.90), the contribution of
   Qs to dVDC  2 /dt is weighted by the term 2L/(3V 2 ), which typically is a small
                                                      sd
   value.
       Figure 8.25 illustrates the response of the controlled DC-voltage power port
   of Figure 8.21 to the same disturbances as described above, but with the feed-
   forward compensation of the DC-bus voltage control loop enabled (i.e., a mea-
   sure of Pext is added to the output of Kv (s), Fig. 8.21). A comparison between
   Figures 8.25 and 8.24 indicates that deviations of VDC from VDCref are consid-
   erably smaller when the feed-forward compensation is employed. The reason
   is that any change in Pext is rapidly communicated to Psref , and the balance of
   power is quickly regained.

8.6.3   Simpliﬁed and Accurate Models
The DC-bus voltage dynamics, described by (8.90), are nonlinear; the nonlinearity is
due to the presence of the instantaneous power of VSC interface reactors. Thus, in
the linearized model of (8.95), the time constant τ is a function of the operating point.
Based on (8.96), τ is negative in the rectifying mode of operation and results in exces-
sive phase lag in the loop gain. This phase lag can lead to unsatisfactory performance
or even instabilities if it is not taken into account in the compensator design.
   In the technical literature, the instantaneous power of the interface reactors is often
ignored [73–76], that is, it is assumed that L ≈ 0 and Pt = Ps . We refer to this model
                                               CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT       243
  Pext (kW)
                 2500
                    0
                −2500
  Psref (kW)




                 2500
                    0
                –2500


                 2500
  Ps (kW)




                    0
                –2500

                 1500
    Qs (kVAr)




                 1000
                  500
                    0
                 –500
                 3750
      V DC (V)




                 2500
                 1250
                    0
                        0   0.1         0.2      0.3              0.4   0.5     0.6   0.7
                                                       time (s)

FIGURE 8.25 Dynamic performance of the controlled DC-voltage power port of Example
8.4 when feed-forward compensation is enabled.


as the simpliﬁed model, which can then be derived from (8.95) by substituting for
τ = 0.
                                                    
                                                    2 1
                       Gv (s) = VDC (s)/Ps (s) = −
                                 2
                                                         .                (8.108)
                                                    C s

The transfer function (8.108) indicates that the simpliﬁed model corresponds to the
accurate model of (8.95) for the zero real-power operating point, that is, Pext0 =
0. However, as demonstrated in Example 8.4, the zero real-power operating point
does not correspond to the worst-case scenario in terms of the compensator design,
since the loop gain phase continues to drop in the rectifying mode of operation.
Consequently, compensator design based on the simpliﬁed model of (8.108) may
result in poor performance or even instabilities [72]. This is further highlighted in
Example 8.5.

     EXAMPLE 8.5                  Instability in Rectifying Mode of Operation
     Consider the controlled DC-voltage power port of Example 8.4 for which Gp (s)
     is given by (8.97). Assume that we have to design a PI compensator, for the
     closed-loop system of Figure 8.22, based on the simpliﬁed model of (8.108).
     Thus, the loop gain includes a double integrator and a negative real pole (i.e.,
244                  GRID-IMPOSED FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM: CONTROL IN dq-FRAME


                     2500
  Pext (kW)


                        0
                 −2500



                     2500
  Psref (kW)




                       0
                –2500



                     2500
  Ps (kW)




                       0
                –2500



                     2500
          V DC (V)




                     660
                       0
                            0   0.1    0.2     0.3         0.4      0.5      0.6   0.7    0.8
                                                        time (s)

FIGURE 8.26 Instability of the DC-bus voltage controller in the rectifying mode of operation;
Example 8.5.


      the pole of Gp (s)); the compensator design process requires to identify the
      zero and the gain of the PI compensator. For a loop gain that possesses two
      integrators (including that of the PI compensator) and one ﬁrst-order lag, the
      method of symmetrical optimum can be effectively employed to determine the
      compensator zero [43]. Based on the symmetrical optimum method, one obtains
      the following compensator that yields a phase margin of 45◦ and a crossover
      frequency of ωc = 415 rad/s:

                                                       s + 172
                                      Kv (s) = 1.996               [−1 ].           (8.109)
                                                          s

      Since the simpliﬁed model of (8.108) does not exhibit any dependence on
      the operating point, one would expect that the closed-loop system remains
      stable over the entire power range. This is, however, not the case. Figure 8.26
      illustrates that while the closed-loop system is stable for Pext = 2.5 MW, it
      becomes oscillatory and unstable when Pext drops from 2.5 to about −2.1 MW.
      The reason is that the actual control plant, described by (8.95) rather than
      (8.108), exhibits a non-minimum-phase zero when Pext becomes negative. For
      this example, two of the three closed-loop poles lie on the RHP when Pext
      becomes smaller than about −2.1 MW. These two poles are s = 4.42 ± j535
      rad/s and correspond to the observed unstable oscillatory response.
9 Controlled-Frequency VSC System
9.1     INTRODUCTION

Chapters 7 and 8 discussed control and operation of the grid-imposed frequency
VSC system in which the operating frequency was predetermined and imposed by
the AC system. These chapters implicitly translated the control of the grid-imposed
frequency VSC system into the control of real and reactive power that the VSC system
exchanges with the AC system, through a current-mode control strategy. This chapter
investigates a class of VSC systems in which the operating frequency is not imposed
by the AC system, but it is controlled by the VSC system itself. We refer to this class
as controlled-frequency VSC system, in which the voltage and frequency at the point
of common coupling (PCC) are controlled; thus, the real and reactive power that the
VSC system exchanges with the AC system are the by-products.
   Typical scenarios where a controlled-frequency VSC system is encountered
include

      r an electronically coupled distributed generation (DG) or distributed energy
        storage (DES) unit1 that supplies a dedicated load, or a cluster of loads,
        under an islanded (off-grid) condition;
      r a VSC-based HVDC converter system that supplies a passive or weak AC system;
        and
      r an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) system that adopts a VSC system as its
        kernel to regulate the frequency and voltage of a sensitive load, for example,
        under emergency conditions.

   In this chapter, we ﬁrst present a dq-frame model for the controlled-frequency VSC
system and then introduce a control strategy that does not require prior knowledge
of the load model. We achieve this objective through a feed-forward compensation
technique that can effectively decouple the VSC system dynamics from those of
the load. Finally, we investigate transitions of the VSC system from the controlled-
frequency mode to the grid-imposed frequency mode, and vice versa.

1 These are collectively referred to as distributed energy resource (DER) units.




Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,      by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                          245
246                                                     CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


9.2                                                 STRUCTURE OF CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM

Figure 9.1 shows a schematic diagram of a controlled-frequency VSC system whose
kernel is a current-controlled VSC [83]. The VSC can be either a two-level VSC or a
three-level NPC. If the VSC is a three-level NPC, a partial DC-side voltage balancer is
also required for its operation (see Sections 6.7, 7.4, and 8.5 for details). Irrespective
of the converter type, based on the uniﬁed dynamic model of Section 6.7.4, the VSC
can be considered as the composition of an ideal (lossless) VSC, an equivalent DC-
bus capacitor, a parallel DC-side current source, and three series, one per each phase,
AC-side resistances.
    In this chapter, we assume that the net DC-side voltage, VDC , is supported by a
DC voltage source. Practically, the DC voltage source can be a DC energy source, for
example, a battery bank, a photovoltaic (PV) array, etc., or it can be a representation
of an electronically-interfaced AC or DC prime source of energy, for example, a wind
turbine-generator set or a fuel cell. The DC voltage source can also be realized by the
controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 8.21.
    In the VSC system of Figure 9.1, each phase of the VSC AC-side terminals is inter-
faced with a three-phase load via an interface RLC ﬁlter. Thus, the control objective
is to regulate the amplitude and frequency of the load voltage, Vsabc , in the presence
of disturbances in the load current, iLabc . The RLC ﬁlter is composed of a series RL
branch and a shunt capacitor, Cf . In this chapter, we develop the model and controllers
of the controlled-frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1 with no speciﬁc assumptions
regarding the load conﬁguration or dynamics. Therefore, we need Cf to ensure that the
RL branch is terminated to a node with some degree of voltage support. Cf provides a
low-impedance path for switching current harmonics generated by the VSC and thus


                                                                            Controlled-frequency VSC system
                                                                                       Current-controlled VSC
                                                                                                                                            Ps
  Controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 8.21




                                                            is                   iDC                                                        Qs
                                                                 +
                                                                                                             Vta R+ron L            ia               Vsa iLa
               DC voltage source or




                                                                                        Averaged           Vtb     R+ron L             ib            Vsb iLb
                                                    +
                                                    –
                                                            VDC iloss        C         ideal three-                                                                       Load
                                                                                       phase VSC           Vtc     R+ron L          ic               Vsc iLc

                                                                 –                                                                                        Cf
                                                                                                                                            Qc
                                                                                   Saturation at ±1    ρ           abc ρ          abc                 ρ             abc
                                                                                                              dq             dq                                dq

                                                                        ρ    Third-harmonic injected PWM
                                                            VDC               signal generator (Fig. 8.17)                                                     iLd iLq
                                                                                         md mq                id iq          Vsd Vsq
                                                                                  Compensators in the dq-frame


                                                                     VCO                 idref iqref                                             ρ
                                                        ω = ω0               ρ


                                                        FIGURE 9.1 Schematic diagram of the controlled-frequency VSC system.
                            MODEL OF CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                247

prevents them from penetrating into the load. Without Cf , harmonic distortion of load
voltage, Vsabc , will signiﬁcantly depend on load impedance at the switching frequency
and its harmonics. The current-controlled VSC and the ﬁlter capacitor deliver the real
and reactive power (Ps , Qs ) and (0, Qc ), respectively. Therefore, the effective power
output of the controlled-frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1, delivered to the load,
is (Ps , Qs + Qc ).
    Figure 9.1 illustrates that the controlled-frequency VSC system is controlled in
a dq-frame. Thus, the feedback and feed-forward signals are transformed to the dq-
frame and processed by the corresponding control loops to produce the required
control signals in dq-frame. Finally, the control signals are transformed to the abc-
frame and delivered to the pulse-width modulation (PWM) scheme of the VSC. The
abc- to dq-frame transformation and its inverse are deﬁned, respectively, by (4.73)
and (4.75), while the angle for transformations, ρ, is obtained from the output of
a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) whose input is dρ/dt = ω(t). ω(t) can be set
to a constant value, for example, the nominal frequency of the power system, ω0 ,
or it can be dynamically controlled in a variable-frequency environment [84]. The
variable-frequency scenario is typically encountered where the VSC system is re-
quired to be capable of operating in both the grid-imposed frequency mode and the
controlled-frequency mode; thus, ω(t) is controlled by a phase-locked loop (PLL) for
synchronization to the AC system voltage [84]. An example of such an application is
also provided in Section 9.4.1.



9.3   MODEL OF CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM

The outlined part in the schematic diagram of Figure 9.1 represents a current-
controlled VSC system, introduced in Section 8.4.1, whose detailed control block
diagram is shown in Figure 9.2. The block diagram of Figure 9.2 is the same as that of
Figure 8.10, which is repeated in this section for ease of reference. With refer-
ence to Figure 9.2, compensators kd (s) and kq (s) are of proportional-integral (PI)
type, as


                                                 kp s + ki
                             kd (s) = kq (s) =             .                      (9.1)
                                                     s


If parameters kp and ki are selected as



                                 kp = L/τi ,                                      (9.2)

                                  ki = (R + ron )/τi ,                            (9.3)
248       CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                                                          Feed-forward
               dq-frame current controller                    filter           Vsd
                                                            Gff (s)
                                                                                     Reactor dynamics
              − edd -axis compensator
                                u                          md VSC Vtd            −           1
 idref                 kd (s) d                                x                       Ls + (R + ron)     id

             id Decoupling feed-forward
                     x         L             VDC        VDC                     x         L
      ω                                                                  ω
                     x         L              2          2
                                                                                x         L
              iq
 iqref             eqq -axis compensatoruq                mq             Vtq     −            1
                          kq(s)                                   x                               +       iq
              −                                                                  − Ls + (R + ron)
                                                            Gff (s)
                                                          Feed-forward         Vsq
                                                              filter

          FIGURE 9.2 Control block diagram of a current-controlled VSC system.



where τi is a design parameter, then d- and q-axis closed-loop transfer functions
assume the forms

                                                                   1
                             Id (s) = Gi (s)Idref (s) =                 Idref (s),                      (9.4)
                                                               τi s + 1
                                                                   1
                             Iq (s) = Gi (s)Iqref (s) =                 Iqref (s).                      (9.5)
                                                               τi s + 1

It is noted that τi turns out to be the time constant of the ﬁrst-order, closed-loop,
transfer functions. With reference to Figure 9.1, dynamics of the load voltage are
described by state-space equations:

                                                  dVsa
                                             Cf        = ia − iLa ,                                     (9.6)
                                                   dt
                                                  dVsb
                                             Cf        = ib − iLb ,                                     (9.7)
                                                   dt
                                                  dVsc
                                             Cf        = ic − iLc .                                     (9.8)
                                                   dt

Equations (9.6)–(9.8) constitute the space-phasor equation

                                                   →
                                                   −
                                                  d Vs  → −
                                                        −    →
                                             Cf        = i − iL .                                       (9.9)
                                                   dt
                                     MODEL OF CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                  249

Expressing each space phasor in (9.9) in terms of its dq-frame components, using
→
−
f = (fd + jfq )ejρ(t) , we obtain

                d -0          1 . 0          1     0          1
           Cf       Vsd + jVsq ejρ = id + jiq ejρ − iLd + jiLq ejρ .                         (9.10)
                dt

It then follows from (9.10) that

                                      dVsd
                                 Cf        = Cf (ωVsq ) + id − iLd                           (9.11)
                                       dt
                                      dVsq
                                 Cf        = −Cf (ωVsd ) + iq − iLq ,                        (9.12)
                                       dt

in which dρ/dt has been replaced by ω(t), as

                                                  dρ
                                                     = ω(t).                                 (9.13)
                                                  dt

The load current components, that is, iLd and iLq , can be regarded as outputs of a
dynamic system whose inputs are Vsd and Vsq . Thus,
                   %         &        %                                                &
                       iLd                g1 (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , Vsd , Vsq , ω, t)
                                 =                                                       ,   (9.14)
                       iLq                g2 (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , Vsd , Vsq , ω, t)


where x1 (t), . . . , xn (t) are the state variables, and g1 (·) and g2 (·) are nonlinear func-
tions of their arguments. Dynamics of the state variables are governed by the equation
                       ⎡        ⎤     ⎡                                    ⎤
                           x1 f1 (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , Vsd , Vsq , ω, t)
                     ⎢ ⎥ ⎢                                                 ⎥
                     ⎢ x2 ⎥ ⎢ f2 (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , Vsd , Vsq , ω, t) ⎥
                     ⎢ ⎥ ⎢                                                 ⎥
                  d ⎢     ⎥ ⎢
                     ⎢ . ⎥ ⎢                         .                     ⎥
                                                                           ⎥
                     ⎢ ⎥=⎢                                                 ⎥,                (9.15)
                  dt ⎢ . ⎥ ⎢                         .                     ⎥
                     ⎢ ⎥ ⎢                                                 ⎥
                     ⎢ . ⎥ ⎢                         .                     ⎥
                     ⎣ ⎦ ⎣                                                 ⎦
                       xn     fn (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn , Vsd , Vsq , ω, t)


where f1 (·), . . . , fn (·) are nonlinear functions of their arguments.
    Equations (9.4), (9.5), and (9.11)–(9.15) describe dynamics of Vsd and Vsq , as
shown in the block diagram of Figure 9.3, illustrating that Vsd and Vsq are the
system outputs whereas id , iq , and ω are the control inputs; id and iq are, in turn,
the responses of the d- and q-axis current controllers of the VSC system to idref and
iqref , respectively. Equations (9.14) and (9.15) describe the dynamics of iLd and iLq
in terms of Vsd , Vsq , and ω. The next two examples show that the complexity and
250        CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


            Current-controlled
                  VSC                         Capacitor dynamics

   idref              1       id              -      1
                                                                         Vsd
                   τ is+1                           Cf s
                                                                                              iLd
                                          x       Cf
      ω                                                                          Load
                                          x       Cf                           dynamics

                                                                                              iLq
                      1       iq              -     1
   iqref                                                                 Vsq
                   τ is+1                     -    Cf s



                FIGURE 9.3 Block diagram of the load voltage dynamic model.




dynamic order of the load model depend on the load conﬁguration and the number of
storage elements2 .


   EXAMPLE 9.1              Dynamic Model of a Series RL Load
   Assume that the load in the system of Figure 9.1 is a three-phase series RL
   branch (Fig. 9.4). With reference to Figure 9.4, we have


                                    di1a
                               L1        = −R1 i1a + Vsa − Vn1 ,
                                     dt
                                    di1b
                               L1        = −R1 i1b + Vsb − Vn1 ,
                                     dt
                                    di1c
                               L1        = −R1 i1c + Vsc − Vn1 ,                                (9.16)
                                     dt

          Equation (9.16) is equivalent to

                                          →
                                          −
                                         d i1      → −
                                                   −     →
                                    L1        = −R1 i1 + Vs .                                   (9.17)
                                          dt

2 The exception is an ideal, independent, current-sourced load for which i
                                                                           Ld and iLq are independent of
Vsd , Vsq , and ω.
                         MODEL OF CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                 251



          Vsa         iLa          i1a R1              L1

          Vsb        iLb           i1b
                                                                  Vn1
          Vsc         iLc         i1c

                  FIGURE 9.4 Series RL load of Example 9.1.


                 →
                 −
Substituting for f = (fd + jfq )ejρ(t) in (9.17) and letting dρ/dt = ω(t), we
obtain

          di1d    R1            1
               = − i1d + ωi1q +    Vsd = f1 (i1d , i1q , Vsd , Vsq ),
           dt     L1            L1
          di1q           R1       1
               = −ωi1d −    i1q +    Vsq = f2 (i1d , i1q , Vsd , Vsq ).        (9.18)
           dt            L1       L1

In addition,

                       iLd = i1d = g1 (i1d , i1q , Vsd , Vsq ),
                       iLq = i1q = g2 (i1d , i1q , Vsd , Vsq ).                (9.19)

Thus, in general, the dynamic system representing the load of Figure 9.4 has two
state variables, three inputs, and two outputs. It is interesting to note that even
if ω(t) is a variable, (9.18) and (9.19) represent a nonlinear dynamic system.

EXAMPLE 9.2          Dynamic Model of a Composite Load
Consider the load system of Figure 9.5, which is composed of parallel connec-
tion of the load of Figure 9.4 and a series RLC branch. The RLC branch of the
load is described by

                       di2a
                    L2      = −R2 i2a + Vsa − Va − Vn2 ,
                        dt
                       di2b
                    L2      = −R2 i2b + Vsb − Vb − Vn2 ,
                        dt
                       di2c
                    L2      = −R2 i2c + Vsc − Vc − Vn2 ,                       (9.20)
                        dt
252     CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM



        Vsa    iLa                                i1a R1 L1

        Vsb    iLb                                i1b
                                                                    Vn1
        Vsc    iLc                                i1c


                        i2a i2b i2c
                        R2

                        L2
                                               +
                        C2                     Vabc
                                               –
                                  Vn2
                   FIGURE 9.5 Composite load of Example 9.2.


  and

                                    dVa
                                 C2     = i2a ,
                                     dt
                                    dVb
                                 C2     = i2b ,
                                     dt
                                    dVc
                                 C2     = i2c .                            (9.21)
                                     dt

  Following the same procedures as those employed for derivation of (9.18) from
  (9.16), based on (9.20) and (9.21) we derive

              di2d    R2            1        1
                   = − i2d + ωi2q +    Vsd −    Vd = f1 (·),
               dt     L2            L2       L2
              di2q           R2       1        1
                   = −ωi2d −    i2q +    Vsq −    Vq = f2 (·),             (9.22)
               dt            L2       L2       L2
                                                                          VOLTAGE CONTROL               253

   and

                                 dVd         1
                                     = ωVq +    i2d = f3 (·),
                                  dt         C2
                                  dVq          1
                                      = −ωVd +    i2q = f4 (·).                                      (9.23)
                                   dt          C2

   Dynamics of the RL branch of the load are described by (9.16) and (9.18),
   Example 9.1. Thus,

                          di1d    R1            1
                               = − i1d + ωi1q +    Vsd = f5 (·),
                           dt     L1            L1
                           di1q           R1       1
                                = −ωi1d −    i1q +    Vsq = f6 (·).                                  (9.24)
                            dt            L1       L1

   Then, since iLabc = i1abc + i2abc , we obtain

                                      iLd = i1d + i2d = g1 (·),
                                      iLq = i1q + i2q = g2 (·).                                      (9.25)

   Equations (9.22)–(9.25) describe dynamics of the load of Figure 9.5 and include
   six state variables, three inputs, and two outputs. These equations also represent
   a nonlinear system if ω is a variable.


9.4    VOLTAGE CONTROL

The control objective for the controlled-frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1 is to
regulate the amplitude and the frequency of the load voltage, Vsabc . Figure 9.1 il-
lustrates that the control is exercised in a dq-frame that is deﬁned by the angle ρ
with respect to the αβ-frame and rotates with the angular velocity dρ/dt = ω. There-
fore, the frequency of the abc-frame variables, including Vsabc , is also ω and can
be readily
       / imposed. On the other hand, regulation of the amplitude           of Vsabc , that is,
                                                                 →
                                                                 −
s = V + Vsq , is equivalent to ensuring that the tip of Vs resides on a circle, as
           2      2
V          sd
                                   →
                                   −
shown in Figure 9.6. However, Vs can assume different angles with respect to the
d-axis, depending on the values of Vsd and Vsq . One possible combination, which we
                                                                  sn is the nominal value
                                                  sn , 0), where V
adopt in this chapter, is that of (Vsd , Vsq ) = (V
   s . This combination is analogous to the case of the grid-imposed frequency VSC
of V
system where Vsq is forced to zero by a PLL3 .

3 In Ref. [84], a slightly different control strategy has been adopted where the frequency, ω, is dynamically

controlled and regulated by the control of Vsq .
254     CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                                   q

                                              Vs
                             Vsq
                                                          tan–1 (Vsq /Vsd)


                                0                         d
                                            Vsd




      FIGURE 9.6 Loci of the load voltage space phasor if the amplitude is constant.


    The control process for the controlled-frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1 can be
based on the dynamic model illustrated in Figure 9.3. The block diagram of Figure 9.3
suggests that Vsd and Vsq can be controlled by idref and iqref . Equations (9.11) and
(9.12) indicate that Vsd and Vsq are coupled and thus the system of Figure 9.3 is a multi-
input-multi-output (MIMO) system. Moreover, the system of Figure 9.3 includes
the impacts of iLd and iLq . As shown in Examples 9.1 and 9.2, even for simple
linear conﬁgurations, the load dynamic model (generically described by (9.14) and
(9.15)) is typically of a high order, strongly intercoupled, time varying, and even
nonlinear. Consequently, the design of a control scheme for the system of Figure 9.3
that guarantees the closed-loop stability or fulﬁlls a prespeciﬁed dynamic performance
is not a straightforward task.
    Figure 9.7 illustrates a possible control structure for the controlled-frequency
VSC system (whose open-loop model is illustrated in Fig. 9.3) that largely over-
comes the aforementioned difﬁculties. Figure 9.7 shows that the coupling between
Vsd and Vsq is eliminated by a decoupling feed-forward compensation [83]. The
feed-forward compensation is similar to the one utilized to decouple id and iq in a
current-controlled VSC (see Fig. 9.2 or Section 8.4.1) and makes it possible to control
Vsd by idref and Vsq by iqref . Figure 9.7 also shows that iLd and iLq are compensated
by means of another feed-forward compensation strategy. Thus, measures of iLd
and iLq are added to idref and iqref , respectively. Therefore, the compensated system
performs under all load conditions almost the same way as the system without the
load-compensating feed-forward would perform under a no-load condition.
    With reference to Figure 9.7, idref and iqref are determined as

                            idref = ud − Cf (ωVsq ) + iLd ,                        (9.26)

                            iqref = uq + Cf (ωVsd ) + iLq .                        (9.27)
                                                                                         VOLTAGE CONTROL             255

                                                         Measurement
                                                         Current-controlled       Capacitor dynamics
                d-axis compensator         iLd                 VSC
            − ed              ud                     idref        1      id   −         1
 Vsdref                 k(s)                                                                           Vsd
                                                 −             τis + 1                 Cf s
                 Decoupling feed-forward                                                                            iLd
          Vsd                                                                 x         Cf
                         x       Cf
                                                                                                           Load
    ω                                                ω                                                   dynamics
                         x        Cf                                          x         Cf
          Vsq
                q-axis compensator
                                                                                                                    iLq
 Vsqref           eq          uq                 iqref           1       iq       −     1
                        k(s)                                                                           Vsq
                −                                              τis + 1            −    Cf s
                                           iLq

                                                         Measurement



FIGURE 9.7 Control block diagram of the controlled-frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1.


where ud and uq are two new control inputs. Then, based on (9.4) and (9.5), id and
iq respond to idref and iqref as
                                                       3    4
                    Id (s) = Gi (s)Ud (s) − Cf Gi (s) £ ωVsq + Gi (s)ILd (s),                                   (9.28)
                    Iq (s) = Gi (s)Uq (s) + Cf Gi (s) £ {ωVsd } + Gi (s)ILq (s),                                (9.29)

where £ {·} denotes the Laplace transform operator. Substitution of id (s) and iq (s)
from (9.28) and (9.29) in the Laplace transforms of (9.11) and (9.12) yields
                                                 3    4
   Cf sVsd (s) = Gi (s)Ud (s) + Cf [1 − Gi (s)] £ ωVsq − [1 − Gi (s)]ILd (s), (9.30)
   Cf sVsq (s) = Gi (s)Uq (s) − Cf [1 − Gi (s)] £ {ωVsd } − [1 − Gi (s)]ILq (s). (9.31)

The transfer function Gi (s) = 1/(τi s + 1) has a unity DC gain, and thus [1 − Gi (s)] =
τi s/(τi s + 1) has a zero DC gain. Therefore, if τi is small, [1 − Gi (s)] is insigniﬁcant
over a relatively wide range of frequencies and can be approximated by zero. Thus,
(9.30) and (9.31) can be simpliﬁed and rewritten as

                                                 Vsd (s)           1
                                                         ≈ Gi (s)      ,                                        (9.32)
                                                 Ud (s)           Cf s
                                                 Vsq (s)           1
                                                         ≈ Gi (s)      ,                                        (9.33)
                                                 Uq (s)           Cf s

which represent two, linear, decoupled systems with ud and uq as inputs and Vsd
and Vsq as respective outputs. Hence, Vsd and Vsq can be independently controlled,
respectively, by ud and uq .
   Figure 9.7 shows that ud and uq are the outputs of two independent compen-
sators. The ﬁrst compensator processes ed = Vsdref − Vsd and generates ud . The other
compensator processes eq = Vsqref − Vsq and generates uq . Then, idref and iqref are
256     CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM



   Vsdref               ed                     ud              1           1
                               k (s)                                              Vsd
                    –                                   τis + 1           Cf s


                        eq                     uq           1              1
   Vsqref                     k (s)                                                Vsq
                    –                                    τis + 1          Cf s

         FIGURE 9.8 Simpliﬁed control block diagram equivalent to Figure 9.7.


constructed based on (9.26) and (9.27) and delivered to the corresponding d- and
q-axis current-control loops. Based on (9.32) and (9.33), one can simplify the closed-
loop block diagram of Figure 9.7 to that of Figure 9.8, which is more insightful for
the compensator design, since it represents two decoupled single-input-single-output
(SISO) control loops.
   Each of the d- and q-axis control loops shown in Figure 9.8 includes one integral
term, that is, one pole at s = 0, in addition to the real pole at s = −1/τi . For a system
of this type, the simplest compensator to fulﬁll fast regulation and zero steady-state
error is a PI compensator. Let the PI compensator be

                                                    s+z
                                      k(s) = k          .                          (9.34)
                                                     s

Then, the loop gain is

                                          k          s+z           1
                             (s) =                                   .            (9.35)
                                       τi Cf        s + τi−1       s2

At low frequencies, ∠(jω) ≈ −180◦ due to the double pole at s = 0. If z < τi−1 ,
∠(jω) ﬁrst increases until it reaches a maximum, δm , at a certain frequency, ωm .
Then, for ω > ωm , ∠(jω) drops and asymptotically approaches −180◦ . δm and ωm
are given by
                                                               
                                                     1 − τi z
                               δm = sin−1                                          (9.36)
                                                     1 + τi z

and
                                                /
                                      ωm =       zτi−1 .                           (9.37)

If the gain crossover frequency ωc is chosen as ωm , then δm becomes the phase
margin. In order for this to hold, the compensator proportional gain, k, must satisfy
                                                            VOLTAGE CONTROL          257

the condition |(jωc )| = |(jωm )| = 1. This yields


                                     k = Cf ωc .                                  (9.38)


    The foregoing method of compensator design is referred to as the method of
symmetrical optimum [43] and is suitable for a loop gain that has two poles at s = 0
(including the PI compensator pole) and one real pole. Based on the symmetrical
optimum method, the resultant closed-loop system is of the third order. It can be
shown that the closed-loop system always has one real pole at s = −ωc in addition to
two other (complex-conjugate) poles that are located on a circle with a radius of ωc .
The exact locations of the two poles on the circle depend on the selected phase margin
that, typically, is selected between 30◦ and 75◦ . Two particular choices of interest are
(i) a phase margin of δm = 45◦ , which renders the two poles complex conjugate and
with a damping ratio of ζ = 0.707, and (ii) a phase margin of δm = 53◦ , which makes
the two poles coincide with s = −ωc . With the second choice, the closed-loop system
will have a triple pole at s = −ωc .
    Example 9.3 demonstrates an application of the symmetrical optimum method and
the performance of the closed-loop system of Figure 9.7.


   EXAMPLE 9.3           Compensator Design for Voltage Regulation Loop
   Consider the controlled-frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1 for which Cf =
   2500 ␮F, L = 100 ␮H, R = 1.19 m, ron = 0.88 m, VDC = 1500 V, and fs =
   1800 Hz. The VSC is a three-level NPC that is switched based on the third-
   harmonic injected PWM and is current-controlled with τi = 0.5 ms (τi−1 =
   2000 rad/s). The load voltage is to be regulated at (Vsdref , Vsqref ) = (400, 0)
   V and a frequency of 377 rad/s. Thus, the VCO input is set to ω0 = 377 rad/s
   (Fig. 9.1). Figure 9.9 shows a schematic diagram of the load that can be re-
   conﬁgured through Switch #1 and Switch #2. The load parameters are given in
   Table 9.1.
      Assuming that a phase margin of 53◦ is desired, based on (9.36) one ﬁnds
   z = 224 rad/s. It then follows from (9.37) and (9.38) that ωc = 669 rad/s and



                    TABLE 9.1     Load Parameters: Example 9.3

                    Quantity                                 Value

                    R1                                      83 m
                    L1                                      137 ␮H
                    R2                                      50 m
                    L2                                       68 ␮H
                    C2                                     13.55 mF
258                 CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                                         Switch
                                          #1
                           Vsa    iLa                                    i1a R1 L1

                           Vsb    iLb                                    i1b

                           Vsc    iLc                                    i1c

                                            i2a i2b i2c
                                       Switch
                                        #2
                                                                        R2        L2   C2




                                  FIGURE 9.9 Load circuit of Example 9.3.


       k = 1.673 −1 . Thus,
                                                                   
                                                          s + 224
                                      k(s) = 1.673                      [−1 ].             (9.39)
                                                             s

       Figure 9.10 illustrates the loop-gain magnitude and phase plots of the load
       voltage regulator using the compensator of (9.39). Figure 9.10 shows that the
       phase margin is about 53◦ at ωc = 669 rad/s.

                   120
 Magnitude (dB)




                    60
                     0
                   −60
                  −120

                  −127
 Phase (deg)




                  −150

                  −180

                  −210 0           1              2              3             4        5       6
                     10          10           10               10            10        10    10
                                                            ω (rad/s)
                           FIGURE 9.10 Open-loop frequency response; Example 9.3.
                                                                      VOLTAGE CONTROL             259

                    600
      Vsdq (V)
                    400                                                                    Vsd
                    200                                                                    Vsq
                      0
                   −200
                    600
       Vsabc (V)




                    400
                    200
                      0
                   −200
                   −400
                   −600

                    6000
  iLdq (A)




                    3000                                                                   iLd
                       0                                                                   iLq
                   −3000
                   −6000
                           0            0.05              0.1               0.15                  0.2
                                                        time (s)
FIGURE 9.11 Start-up transient and step response of the controlled-frequency VSC system
of Example 9.3 under the no-load condition.


         Figures 9.11–9.13 illustrate the dynamic performance of the controlled-
      frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1, in response to the start-up process and
      stepwise changes in Vsdref (Vsqref = 0), under the following three load condi-
      tions:

                   r The no-load condition, that is, when Switch #1 and Switch #2 are open.
                     The system response for this case is shown in Figure 9.11.
                   r A partially loaded condition, that is, when Switch #1 is closed but Switch
                     #2 is open. Under this conﬁguration, the load dynamic equations are the
                     same as those in Example 9.1. The system response for this case is shown
                     in Figure 9.12.

                     600
      Vsdq (V)




                     400                                                                   Vsd
                     200                                                                   Vsq
                       0
                    −200
                     600
       Vsabc (V)




                     400
                     200
                       0
                    −200
                    −400
                    −600

                    6000
  i Ldq (A)




                    3000                                                                   i Ld
                       0                                                                   i Lq
                   −3000
                   −6000
                           0            0.05              0.1               0.15                  0.2
                                                        time (s)
FIGURE 9.12 Start-up transient and step response of the controlled-frequency VSC system
of Example 9.3 under a partially loaded condition.
260                 CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                     600
      Vsdq (V)
                     400                                                                   Vsd
                     200                                                                   Vsq
                       0
                    −200

                    600
       Vsabc (V)




                    400
                    200
                      0
                   −200
                   −400
                   −600

                    6000
  i Ldq (A)




                    3000                                                                   i Ld
                       0                                                                   i Lq
                   −3000
                   −6000
                           0            0.05              0.1               0.15                  0.2

                                                        time (s)
FIGURE 9.13 Start-up transient and step response of the controlled-frequency VSC system
of Example 9.3 under the fully loaded condition.


                   r The fully loaded condition, that is, when Switch #1 and Switch #2 are both
                     closed. For this conﬁguration, the load dynamic equations are the same as
                     those in Example 9.2 and the response is illustrated in Figure 9.13.

      For all three cases, initially the VSC gating signals are blocked and all con-
      trollers are inactive. At t = 0.01 s, gating signals are unblocked, controllers are
      enabled, and Vsdref is ramped up from zero to 400 V. At t = 0.075 s, Vsdref is
      subjected to a step change from 400 to 450 V. At t = 0.125 s, Vsdref is subjected
      to another step change from 450 to 400 V.
          Figures 9.11–9.13 show that, as expected, in all three cases Vsq remains
      relatively regulated at zero, despite the changes in Vsd . This is a result of the
      adopted decoupling feed-forward control. Moreover, since we have adopted a
      load-compensating feed-forward control in the closed-loop system (see (9.26)
      and (9.27), and Fig. 9.7), we expect the system response to be invariant to
      the load conditions. A comparison of Figures 9.12 and 9.13 with Figure 9.11
      reveals that the system responses under the loaded conditions are quite similar
      in pattern to that of the no-load condition. The reason for discrepancies in re-
      sponses is that the bandwidths of d- and q-axis current controllers are limited.
      Consequently, the load dynamics are not perfectly masked and manifest them-
      selves in closed-loop responses, as (9.30) and (9.31) indicate. Theoretically, if
      τi in (9.4) and (9.5) approaches zero, the responses shown in Figures 9.12 and
      9.13 become identical to that of the no-load condition shown in Figure 9.11.
          Figure 9.14 illustrates the performance of the controlled-frequency VSC
      system in response to sudden changes in the load. Initially, the system is under
      a steady-state condition while both Switch #1 and Switch #2 are open and thus
      the load current is zero as Figure 9.14(a) illustrates. At t = 0.2 s, Switch #1 is
      closed and the RL branch of the load is switched on. Based on parameters of
      Table 9.1, the load rating is 2.1 MW at 0.85 lagging power factor. Following
                                                             VOLTAGE CONTROL            261

                6000
  i Labc (A)

                3000
                   0
               −3000
                     (a)
               −6000
                6000
                3000                                                             i Ld
 i Ldq (A)




                                                                                 i Lq
                   0
               −3000
                          (b)
               −6000
                    800
                                                                                 Vsd
       Vsdq (V)




                    400                                                          Vsq
                      0
                          (c)
                   −400

                    400
       Vsabc (V)




                      0
                   −400
                   −800 (d)
                       0.2      0.3              0.4               0.5                  0.6
                                              time (s)
FIGURE 9.14 Dynamic response of the controlled-frequency VSC system of Example 9.3
to sudden changes in the load conﬁguration.


      the load energization, the load current increases (Fig. 9.14(a)), and iLd and
      iLq assume nonzero values (Fig. 9.14(b)). Since iLabc lags Vsabc , that is, the
      load is inductive, iLq is negative (Fig. 9.14(b)). Figure 9.14(c) shows that Vsd
      and Vsq undergo transients due to the disturbance, but rapidly revert to their
      corresponding predisturbance values. Figure 9.14(d) shows that following the
      disturbance Vsabc undergoes ﬂuctuations that are damped in less than three
      60-Hz cycles.

   At t = 0.3 s, Switch #2 is closed and the RLC branch of the load is also energized.
Thus, the resultant load assumes the same conﬁguration as the one introduced in
Example 9.2. Based on parameters of Table 9.1, the composite load has a rating of
2.5 MW at unity power factor. Therefore, as Figure 9.14(b) illustrates, iLq becomes
zero in steady state. Figure 9.14(b) also illustrates that iLd exhibits a large, sharp
overshoot due to the charging current of the capacitor C2 , although R2 and L2 limit
the amplitude and the rate of change of the charging current. Figure 9.14(c) shows
that the transients of Vsd and Vsq are damped in less than three 60-Hz cycles. The
maximum deviation of the amplitude of Vabc is about 20% of the nominal voltage of
400 V (Fig. 9.14(d)).
   At t = 0.4 s, Switch #2 opens and the RLC branch is deenergized. Therefore,
the load conﬁguration and the operating condition become identical to those during
the time interval between 0.2 and 0.3 s. Figure 9.14(a) shows that the steady-state
262     CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


amplitude of iLabc does not signiﬁcantly change compared to that under the
predisturbance condition. The reason is that although the opening of Switch #2
reduces the load real power from 2.5 to 2.1 MW, it also results in a reduction of the
load power factor from unity to 0.85. Figure 9.14(d) illustrates that the impact of the
disturbance on Vsbc is negligible.
   At t = 0.5 s, Switch #1 is opened and the rest of the load is also deenergized. Figure
9.14(a) shows that the current of one phase becomes zero, and then the currents of the
other two phases simultaneously become zero. The reason is that the switch current
interruptions occur at the current zero crossings. Figure 9.14(b) shows that iLd and
iLq become zero when the switch opens. Figure 9.14(c) illustrates that the disturbance
causes large transients in Vsd and Vsq . Consequently, Vsc reaches about −720 V, at
t = 0.503 s, as Figure 9.14(d) shows.


9.4.1   Autonomous Operation
A VSC system may need to be required to operate in the grid-imposed frequency
mode, as well as in the controlled-frequency mode. Consider the VSC system of
Figure 9.15(a) in which the controlled-frequency VSC system of Figure 9.1 can be
connected to an AC system in addition to the load. The connection to the AC system
is possible through a main switch, and the point of connection is referred to as PCC.
Thus, the entity including the VSC system and the load may operate in either the
grid-connected mode or the autonomous (islanded) mode.
    First assume that the main switch is closed and, therefore, the load voltage Vsabc
is the same as the PCC voltage Vgabc and imposed by the AC system. Under this
condition, the VSC system is synchronized to Vgabc and acts as a real-/reactive-power
controller. Thus, the power delivered to the AC system is equal to the power delivered
by the VSC system minus the load power. The real and reactive power delivered by
the VSC system are, in turn, determined by the commands idref and iqref , as discussed
in Chapter 8.
    Now assume that a disturbance occurs in the AC system and results in consider-
able changes in the voltage and inductance of the (Thevenin equivalent circuit of the)
AC system, that is, V∞abc and Lg . Except under special circumstances, the distur-
bance entails considerable deviations of Vsabc , Vgabc , and the frequency, ω, from their
respective nominal values; dynamics of the voltage(s) and frequency depend primar-
ily on the set points idref and iqref , the load conﬁguration and dynamic properties,
and the PLL dynamic characteristics. The disturbance may be intentionally initiated,
for example, to allow maintenance operations within the AC system, or it may be a
consequence of a fault within the AC system.
    If the disturbance is preplanned or it can be rapidly detected [85], the circuit com-
posed of the VSC system and the load can be isolated from the AC system by opening
the main switch. Thus, the operational mode of the VSC system can be switched from
the grid-imposed frequency mode to the controlled-frequency mode, such that the load
voltage and frequency remain regulated at about their respective nominal values. The
latter mode of operation is also known as the autonomous mode of operation. For
the system of Figure 9.15, the autonomous mode is realized if (i) the VCO input is
                                                                                               VOLTAGE CONTROL                  263

                              VSC system of Fig. 9.1

                                                       Ps                                        PCC
                                                                                         Main                       AC system
                                                       Qs                               switch
                   idref                                                                                            Lg V
                                               ia                   Vsa iLa              0            Vga iga           ∞a
                                                                                                                       +




                                                                                                                          −
   From                                                                                    1
 multiplexer                       Current-                                                                         Lg V∞ b
                                  controlled
                                               ib                   Vsb iLb                0          Vgb igb
                   iqref                                                                                               +




                                                                                                                          −
                                    VSC                                                    1
                                   system      ic                   Vsc iLc                0          Vgc igc       Lg V∞ c
                                                                                                                       +




                                                                                                                          −
          From          ρ                                                                  1
          VCO
                                                                          Cf                           Mode     0: Autonomous
                                                        Qc
                                                                                                     command
                                                                                                                1: Grid-connected
                                                                                Load
                                                                       (a)
      Vsdref                                   idref
                              Load
                        voltage controller     iqref          Multiplexer
                                                                                                                         To
             0              (Fig. 9.7)                          0
                                                                                                                     main switch
                                                                1
                                                                               idref
                                                                                        To controlled-frequency
                                                                0                                VSC
                                               idref            1              iqref
        Psref
                            Equations
                        (8.43) and (8.44)      iqref
      Qsref                                                                                           0: Autonomous
                                                                                         Mode
                                                                                       command
                                                                                                      1: Grid-connected

        ω0                                             Frequency limiter            Multiplexer
                                                                                        0            VCO
                                    Compensator                 Δω max                           ω
                                                                                                       兰        ρ
                                                                                        1
                                        H(s)
                                                         Δω min
  Vga                                                                          Threshold/
                 abc
                            Vgd                                                hysteresis
                                         Peak detector
  Vgb                                                                                  1
                                                                                               Gridback
                   dq       Vgq       V̂g = V 2gd +V 2gq             LPF
                                                                                                 flag
  Vgc                                                                           0

             ρ
                                                                                Window
                                                                                detector

                                                        Vgq         LPF
                                                                                                                Mode
                                                                                                     Logics   command
                                                         ω          LPF

                                       Islanding detection          Islanding detection flag
                                             scheme

                                                                       (b)
FIGURE 9.15 Schematic diagram of a VSC system and its supervisory control scheme for
operation in both grid-connected and islanded modes.
264     CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


set to ω0 , (ii) idref and iqref are obtained from the d- and q-axis compensators of a
voltage regulation scheme, as discussed in Section 9.4, and (iii) the main switch is
commanded to open and thus igabc is forced to become zero.
    When the AC system resumes its normal condition and permits the VSC system to
operate in the grid-imposed frequency mode, the PCC voltage retrieves its nominal
qualities. Then, the VSC system must be resynchronized to Vgabc before reclosure
of the main switch (Fig. 9.15(a)). Although in the controlled-frequency mode the
frequency is regulated at the nominal value of the AC system frequency, a phase
error is likely to exist between Vsabc and Vgabc when the AC system is restored.
As Figure 9.15(b) shows, the AC system restoration is detected by comparing the
amplitude of Vgabc with a threshold, for example, 90% of its corresponding nominal
value. Thus, once V    g is larger than the threshold, the AC system is considered as
restored and the VCO is switched from the free-running mode, in which ω(t) = ω0 ,
to the PLL mode in which ω(t) = ω0 + ω(t). ω(t) is dynamically controlled by
the compensator H(s) that attempts to regulate Vgq at zero and is constrained by a
saturation block to upper and lower limits. To prevent multiple transitions between the
free-running mode and the PLL mode, V     g is passed through a low-pass ﬁlter (LPF) and
a hysteresis block. Figure 9.15(b) also shows that when Vgq and ω(t) are adequately
close to their steady-state values of, respectively, zero and ω0 , the synchronization
scheme changes the mode command from 0 to 1. This, in turn, results in (i) the closure
of the main switch and (ii) the issuance of idref and iqref in proportion to the required
real and reactive power. Thereafter, the VSC system continues its operation in the
grid-imposed frequency mode.
    The following examples demonstrate the operation of the system of Figure 9.15
in the autonomous and grid-connected modes.

   EXAMPLE 9.4          Operation Under Accidental Islanding Condition
   Consider the system of Figure 9.15 in which the parameters and the controllers
   of the VSC system are the same as those of the VSC system of Example 9.3.
   The load conﬁguration is illustrated in Figure 9.16 in which R1 = 83 m,
   R2 = R3 = 25 , L1 = 137 ␮H, L2 = L3 = 45 ␮H, C2 = 163 ␮F, and C3 =
   186 ␮F. The Thevenin equivalent voltage and inductance of the AC system are
   480 Vrms line-to-line and Lg = 2.0 ␮H, respectively.
      Initially, the main switch is closed and the VSC system operates in the
   grid-connected (grid-imposed frequency) mode, for which idref = 2000 A cor-
   responding to a real power of 1.17 MW delivered by the VSC system. Even
   though iqref is set to zero, the reactive power delivered by the VSC system is
   equal to 217 kVAr due to the ﬁlter capacitor Cf . The load absorbs the real and
   reactive power of 2.0 MW and 1.21 MVAr. Thus, the AC system supplies the
   balance of 830 kW and 993 KVAr. At t = 0.1 s, the AC system line is discon-
   nected (by a circuit breaker that is not shown in the schematic diagram), that is,
   igabc is forced to zero, while the main switch is still closed. Consequently, the
   VSC system and the load form an island. However, the VSC system remains in
   the grid-imposed frequency mode of operation until the islanding condition is
                                                                        VOLTAGE CONTROL                265


      Vsa           iLa                                                             i1a      R1   L1

      Vsb           iLb                                                             i1b

      Vsc           iLc                                                             i1c


                           i2a      i2b     i2c        i3a       i3b          i3c

                          R2 L2                      R3 L3

                          C2                          C3

                                  FIGURE 9.16 Load circuit of Example 9.4.


      detected and the operational mode is switched to the autonomous (controlled-
      frequency) mode of operation.
         Figure 9.17 illustrates the system response under the condition that the is-
      landing condition is detected in 50 ms and the operational mode is changed. It

              600
              400
 Vsabc (V)




              200
                0
             −200
             −400
             −600

              600
              400
 Vgabc (V)




              200
                0
             −200
             −400
             −600

                385
                383
    ω (rad/s)




                381
                379
                377
                375
                373
                  0.04           0.07       0.1         0.13           0.16           0.19         0.22
                                                      time (s)

FIGURE 9.17 Response of the VSC system of Figure 9.15 to an unplanned islanding con-
dition with an islanding detection delay of 50 ms; Example 9.4.
266               CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


              600
              400
 Vsabc (V)



              200
                0
             −200
             −400
             −600

              600
              400
 Vgabc (V)




              200
                0
             −200
             −400
             −600

                378
    ω (rad/s)




                377

                376

                375
                  0.04     0.07       0.1       0.13         0.16        0.19         0.22
                                              time (s)

FIGURE 9.18 Response of the VSC system of Figure 9.15 to an unplanned islanding con-
dition with an islanding detection delay of 3.0 ms; Example 9.4.

      can be observed that subsequent to the formation of the island and until the op-
      erational mode is modiﬁed, Vsabc and Vgabc reduce to half whereas ω increases
      to its upper limit of 383 rad/s (the upper limit is imposed by the saturation
      block of the PLL, Fig. 9.15(b)). When the formation of the island is detected,
      the operational mode is switched to the controlled-frequency mode, ω is set
      to ω0 = 377 rad/s, and the main switch is opened. Thus, Vgabc becomes zero
      whereas Vsabc is regulated at its nominal value by the controlled-frequency
      system.
          Figure 9.18 shows the response of the VSC system under the condition
      that the formation of the island is detected after 3.0 ms. Figure 9.18 illus-
      trates that, in contrast to the previous case study, ω and Vsabc remain relatively
      regulated. Ideally, if the islanding condition is instantaneously detected, Vsabc
      and ω do not experience any excursions with respect to their predisturbance
      condition.


      EXAMPLE 9.5             Resynchronization to the AC System Voltage
      Consider the system of Example 9.4 in the context of Figure 9.15, under the
      condition that the main switch is open and the VSC system operates in the
      controlled-frequency mode. Thus, the load voltage is regulated at its nom-
      inal value corresponding to Vsd = 400 V and Vsq = 0. Figures 9.19–9.22
                                                                    VOLTAGE CONTROL         267

                600
                400
     Vg (V)



                200
                         0

             600
             400                                                                      Vgd
 Vgdq (V)




             200                                                                      Vgq
               0
            −200
            −400
            −600

                379
                377
   ω (rad/s)




                375
                373
                371
                369

                         1
               reclose




                         0
                             0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4     0.5      0.6     0.7          0.8
                                                   time (s)

FIGURE 9.19 Overall response of the VSC system of Figure 9.15 to grid restoration, syn-
chronization, and reconnection; Example 9.5.



     demonstrate the resynchronization of the load voltage to the PCC voltage,
     followed by reclosure of the main switch.
         As Figure 9.19 illustrates, at t = 0.1 s the AC system is restored and the
     amplitude of Vgabc increases. Consequently, Vgq assumes a negative value due
     to the phase shift between Vsabc and Vgabc . The restoration of the AC system
     is detected after a delay of about 0.08 s, corresponding to the response time
     of the LPF. Therefore, the operational mode of the VCO is switched from the
     free-running mode to the PLL mode, at t = 0.18 s, and H(s) reduces ω to
     regulate Vgq at zero. Initially, Vgq is large (in absolute value) and ω is saturated
     at its lower limit of 371 rad/s. However, as Vgq tends to be zero, ω approaches
     377 rad/s. Figure 9.19 illustrates that at about t = 0.6 s, both Vgq and ω are within
     their respective permissible limits, and the main switch is commanded to close.
     Figure 9.20 provides a closer look at Vsa , Vga , ω, Vgd , and Vgq , from t = 0 to
     t = 0.35 s. Figure 9.20 illustrates that subsequent to AC system restoration, Vga
     lags Vsa by about 90◦ . However, when ω is decreased by the PLL compensator
     to 371 rad/s, both Vgq and the phase shift approach zero.
         Figure 9.21 illustrates the waveforms of Vsabc and Vgabc about the instant
     when mode command is changed from 0 to 1 and the main switch is closed. As
     shown in Figure 9.21, since the two voltages are synchronized, the reclosure
268                       CONTROLLED-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                    600
 Vsa and Vga (V)


                    400                                                                                Vsa
                    200                                                                                Vga
                      0
                   −200
                   −400
                   −600

                    379
                    377
      ω (rad/s)




                    375
                    373
                    371
                    369

                    800
                    600                                                                                Vgd
                    400                                                                                Vgq
 Vgdq (V)




                    200
                      0
                   −200
                   −400
                   −600
                      0.05               0.1       0.15             0.2        0.25       0.3                0.35
                                                                 time (s)

FIGURE 9.20 System response during the synchronization process subsequent to grid
restoration; Example 9.5.
                              1
                    reclose




                              0

                    600
                    400
     Vsabc (V)




                    200
                      0
                   −200
                   −400
                   −600

                    600
                    400
   Vgabc (V)




                    200
                      0
                   −200
                   −400
                   −600
                      0.57        0.58     0.59   0.6     0.61     0.62 0.63     0.64   0.65    0.66     0.67
                                                                 time (s)

FIGURE 9.21 Responses of the load and PCC voltages to the reconnection disturbance;
Example 9.5.
                                                                    VOLTAGE CONTROL       269

                       1
             reclose




                       0

             5000
             4000
    id (A)




             3000
             2000
             1000

             1000
                       0
 iq (A)




          −1000
          −2000
          −3000
              0.57         0.58   0.59   0.6   0.61     0.62 0.63   0.64   0.65   0.66   0.67
                                                      time (s)

FIGURE 9.22 Responses of the VSC d- and q-axis current components to the switching in
the operational mode; Example 9.5.


   does not result in signiﬁcant transients. When mode command is changed, the
   commands idref and iqref are withdrawn from the outputs of the load voltage
   controller and get set at two independent values corresponding to real- and
   reactive-power requirements. Figure 9.22 shows that, before the mode command
   change at t = 0.6 s, id and iq are equal to 3500 and −1655 A, respectively, as
   commanded by the load voltage controller of Figure 9.7. Once mode command
   is changed from 0 to 1, id and iq track their respective reference values of
   idref = 2000 A and iqref = 0, corresponding to Ps = 1.17 MW and Qs = 0,
   respectively. Under the nominal voltage, the load demands real and reactive
   power of 2.0 MW and 1.21 MVAr, and Cf supplies the reactive power of Qc =
   0.217 MVAr. Hence, in the grid-connected mode, the AC system supplies real
   and reactive power of 0.830 MW and 0.993 MVAr.
10 Variable-Frequency VSC System
10.1    INTRODUCTION

This chapter introduces a class of VSC systems that we refer to as variable-frequency
VSC system. A variable-frequency VSC system constitutes the kernel of an elec-
tromechanical energy conversion system in which the VSC AC side is interfaced with
the stator terminals of an electric machine1 . The VSC system controls the machine
voltage and frequency such that the torque is controlled and the ﬂux is regulated at
its nominal value. The torque control in turn permits control of the machine power.
In a variable-frequency VSC system, the machine speed is usually variable and thus
the VSC system operates in a variable-frequency environment. Typical applications
of a variable-frequency VSC system include variable-frequency wind-power units,
gas microturbine units, and industrial regenerative drive systems. The ﬁrst of the
aforementioned applications is discussed in Chapter 13.
    In this chapter, we ﬁrst adopt the model developed in Appendix A for a symmetrical
three-phase AC machine. Then, based on the model, we present the methodology of
vector control (or vectorial control) for fast torque control and robust ﬂux regulation.
We introduce proper control schemes for the asynchronous machine, the doubly-fed
asynchronous machine, and the permanent-magnet synchronous machine (PMSM).


10.2    STRUCTURE OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM

Figure 10.1 shows a schematic diagram of a variable-frequency VSC system to con-
trol the asynchronous machine or the PMSM. Methodologies of this chapter can also
be applied to the conventional (wound-rotor) synchronous machine. However, since
dynamics and control of the synchronous machine are very similar to those of the
PMSM, the methodologies are not repeated for the synchronous machine; the main
difference is that the rotor ﬂux in the synchronous machine is generated by the ro-
tor winding, whereas in the PMSM a set of permanent magnets generates the rotor
ﬂux.


1 If the machine is of the doubly-fed asynchronous type, the VSC is interfaced with the machine rotor

terminals, whereas the machine stator is directly interfaced with the AC system.

Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,     by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

270
                                STRUCTURE OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                                  271

  DC voltage source
                          is               iDC
                                                                                           Ps
                      +
                                                                               Vsa              isa

  Controlled                                           Averaged                Vsb              isb
  DC-voltage +
                      VDC      iloss       C          ideal three-                                    Machine
  power port –
  (Fig. 8.21)                                         phase VSC
                                                                               Vsc              isc


                      –


                                                                                          abc
                                                      Saturation at ± 1    ρ         dq


                                       ρ       Third-harmonic injected PWM
                                                signal generator (Fig. 8.17)
                      VDC                               md mq                  isd isq

                                           Flux/torque controllers in dq-frame


                                                      λref         Teref

FIGURE 10.1 Variable-frequency VSC system for controlling the asynchronous machine or
the PMSM.



   The variable-frequency VSC system of Figure 10.1 employs a three-phase VSC
that is directly interfaced with the machine stator. Commonly, no inductors are in-
stalled between the VSC AC-side terminals and the machine terminals since, due to the
machine relatively large inductance, the VSC switching voltage harmonics result in
negligible current harmonics. The VSC can be a two-level VSC or a three-level NPC,
supplied from a DC voltage source or a rectiﬁed AC voltage source. The VSC can also
be supplied by a controlled DC-voltage power port (see Section 8.6 for details) and
establishes a bidirectional power ﬂow path between the AC system interfaced with the
controlled DC-voltage power port and the mechanical load/mover interfaced with the
machine shaft. If the VSC is a three-level NPC, its net DC-bus voltage must be equally
divided between the two DC-side capacitors. Thus, a partial DC-side voltage equaliz-
ing scheme is required to guarantee proper operation of the VSC system (see Sections
6.7, 7.4, and 8.5 for details). Irrespective of its type, the VSC can be modeled by an
ideal (lossless) VSC, a current source connected in parallel with the VSC DC side,
and three resistors each in series with one of the VSC AC-side terminals (Fig. 5.2).
As discussed in Chapter 5, the current source mainly represents the VSC switching
power loss, whereas the resistors represent the on-state resistance of each VSC switch
cell. The on-state resistance can be taken into account as part of the machine stator
resistance.
   Figure 10.2 shows a variable-frequency VSC system that is used to control the
doubly-fed asynchronous machine. For the doubly-fed asynchronous machine, the
272       VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


DC voltage source
                        is                iDC
                    +                                                                                                    Ps
                                                                            Vra ira Pr                                                  AC system
                                                                                                                 Vsa              isa   Lg
  Controlled                                                                                                                                 +




                                                                                                                                              –
  DC-voltage +
                                                   Averaged              Vrb irb                                 Vsb              isb
                 VDC         iloss                ideal three-                                        Machine                                +




                                                                                                                                              –
  power port –                            C                                                                      Vsc              isc
  (Fig. 8.21)                                     phase VSC                 Vrc irc                                                          +




                                                                                                                                              –
                    –                                                                                          abc          abc
                                                                                                          αβ           αβ
                                                                                                 θr
                                                   Saturation at ± 1         ρ             abc           Vsα Vsβ       isα isβ
                                                                                   dq

                                      ρ     Third-harmonic injected PWM
                                             signal generator (Fig. 8.17)
                    VDC                              md mq                       ird irq
                                     Flux/torque controllers in dq-frame



                                                  λref           Teref

FIGURE 10.2 Variable-frequency VSC system for controlling the doubly-fed asynchronous
machine.




VSC is interfaced with the machine rotor windings, whereas the stator windings are
directly connected to a constant-frequency AC system. The variable-frequency VSC
system of Figure 10.2 is employed when the variable speed capability is required over
a fairly limited range of speed [43]; the main advantage is that the VSC handles a
fraction of the machine total power and is therefore of a smaller size and power rating.
The variable-frequency VSC system of Figure 10.2 has been proposed for MW-range
wind-power units [86, 87].
   Figures 10.1 and 10.2 illustrate that the variable-frequency VSC system is con-
trolled in a dq-frame. The αβ-frame control is not an attractive methodology for
the variable-frequency VSC system since the variable-frequency nature of the
waveforms complicates the design of constant-parameter compensators. In case of the
grid-imposed frequency VSC system, compensators in αβ-frame include complex-
conjugate poles at the operating frequency, to provide zero steady-state error (see
Example 7.1, Section 7.3.3). Such an implementation is not straightforward for the
variable-frequency VSC system since the operating frequency is not constant. In
this chapter, we identify dq frames suitable to control the asynchronous machine, the
doubly-fed asynchronous machine, and the PMSM. The control inputs of the variable-
frequency VSC system are the torque command, Teref , and the reference ﬂux, λref .
We assume that the reference ﬂux is set to the machine rated ﬂux and is normally not
changed. Depending on the application, the torque command is usually the output of
another control loop. For example, in a wind-power unit, Teref is forced to change
proportional to the square of the machine rotor speed, to maximize the output power
[88].
                             CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM              273

10.3   CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM

The equations governing dynamics of a symmetrical three-phase AC machine, as
presented in Appendix A, are
                         →
                         −
                        d λs   →
                               −        →
                                        −
                             = V s − Rs is ,                                    (10.1)
                         dt
                         →
                         −
                        d λr   →
                               −        →
                                        −
                             = V r − R r ir ,                                   (10.2)
                         dt
                          →
                          −                  −
                                              →      →
                                                     −
                          λs = Lm (1 + σs ) is + ejθr ir ,                      (10.3)
                          →
                          −                  −
                                              →        →
                                                       −
                          λr = Lm (1 + σr ) ir + e−jθr is ,                     (10.4)

where the stator and rotor leakage factors σs and σr are deﬁned as
                                            Ls
                                     σs =      − 1,                             (10.5)
                                            Lm
                                            Lr
                                    σr =       − 1.                             (10.6)
                                            Lm

Ls and Lr are the stator and rotor inductances, respectively, and Lm is the magnetizing
                               →
                               −       →
                                       −
inductance. Substituting for λs and λr in (10.1) and (10.2), from (10.3) and (10.4),
we obtain
                          d           −
                                       →         → −
                                                 −      →        →
                                                                 −
                     Lm       (1 + σs ) is + ejθr ir = Vs − Rs is ,              (10.7)
                         dt
                        d           −
                                     →           → −
                                                 −      →        →
                                                                 −
                    Lm      (1 + σr ) ir + e−jθr is = Vr − Rr ir .               (10.8)
                       dt
The machine electrical torque is
                                     
                                3            →−
                                             −   → 
                        Te =      Lm Im e−jθr is ir ∗ .                         (10.9)
                                2

The machine rotor speed, ωr , is related to the machine torque by

                                    dωr
                                J       = Te − Text ,                          (10.10)
                                     dt
where Text is the torque corresponding to the mechanical load/source that also embeds
friction and windage losses, and

                                      dθr
                                          = ωr .                               (10.11)
                                      dt
274      VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


In some applications, Text does not depend (or depends weakly) on ωr or θr and
therefore can be regarded as a disturbance input to the control system. However, in
most energy conversion applications, Text is a function of ωr , θr , and other exogenous
variables. For example, in a wind turbine Text is a nonlinear function of the machine
rotor speed, wind speed, and turbine pitch angle. If the pulsating torque of a horizontal-
axis wind turbine is also considered, then Text is also a nonlinear function of the rotor
position, θr . In general,


                            Text = f (ωr , θr , u1 , ..., un ) ,                  (10.12)


where u1 , ..., un are exogenous variables. Equations (10.7)–(10.12) describe an
electromechanical system consisting of the machine and the mechanical system.
Equations (10.7)–(10.9) correspond to the machine electrical dynamics whereas
(10.10)–(10.12) describe the mechanical system. The electrical equations can be made
decoupled from those of the mechanical system if participation of θr in (10.7)–(10.9)
is compensated. As such, the electromechanical system can be divided into two sub-
                                               →
                                               −       →
                                                       −
systems: the electrical subsystem for which Vs and Vr are the control inputs and
Te is the output, and the mechanical subsystem for which Te is the control input.
Depending on the application, ωr , θr , or the mechanical power Pm = Text ωr can be
deﬁned as the output. In this chapter, we concentrate on the control of Te by the VSC
system.


10.3.1   Asynchronous Machine
10.3.1.1 Machine Model in Rotor-Field Coordinates In this section, we present
the controls for the VSC system of Figure 10.1 that is interfaced with an asyn-
chronous machine. We consider a squirrel-cage asynchronous machine or, equiv-
alently, a wound-rotor asynchronous machine whose rotor terminals are short cir-
                                                                      →
                                                                      −           →
                                                                                  −
cuited and rotor current is not measurable. Thus, in (10.7)–(10.9), Vr = 0 and ir is
not measurable.
                                                       −→
   Let us introduce the ﬁctitious space phasor current imr = imr ejp and the change of
                      →
                      −     →
                            −     →
                                  −
variable (1 + σr )ejθr ir + is = imr , [43]. Then, we have

                                 →
                                 −          →
                                            −
                        (1 + σr ) ir + e−jθr is = imr ej(ρ−θr ) .                (10.13)

            →
            −
Solving for ir in (10.13), we deduce

                                            →
                                            −
                               → imr ejρ − is −jθr
                               −
                               ir =           e     .                             (10.14)
                                     1 + σr
                               CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM            275

                 →
                 −
Substituting for ir from (10.14) in (10.9), we obtain

                                                   −
                           3         Lm               → # −jρ − → $
                   Te =                         Im    is imr e − is ∗
                           2       1 + σr
                                                 →      
                       =
                         3           Lm     imr Im −
                                                    is e−jρ .                  (10.15)
                         2         1 + σr

                             →
                             −
Based on (4.65), the term is e−jρ corresponds to an αβ- to dq-frame
                                                                 −     transformation
                                                                         
                                                                  →
for which the angle is ρ, as illustrated in Figure 10.1. Thus, Im is e−jρ is the q-axis
               →
               −
component of is , denoted by isq , in that dq-frame, and

                                                        
                                          3         Lm     imr isq .
                                   Te =                                        (10.16)
                                          2       1 + σr

 The advantage of the change of variable (10.13) now becomes apparent; based on
(10.16), if imr is maintained at a constant value, the machine torque becomes a linear
function of the q-axis component of the stator current, isq .
                   →
                   −
   Considering Vr = 0, dynamics of imr and ρ can be derived by substituting for
         →
         −            →
                      −      →
                             −
(1 + σr ) ir + e−jθr is and ir in (10.8), from (10.13) and (10.14). The result is

                       d  j(ρ−θr )                      →
                                                           −
                  τr      imr e        = −imr ej(ρ−θr ) + is e−jθr ,          (10.17)
                       dt

where the rotor time constant τr is deﬁned as

                                                (1 + σr ) Lm
                                      τr =                   .                 (10.18)
                                                    Rr

Calculating the derivative in (10.17) and simplifying the resultant, we deduce


                       dimr                                →
                                                            −
                  τr         + j (ω − ωr ) τrimr = −imr + is e−jρ ,          (10.19)
                         dt

where

                                                      dρ
                                              ω=         ,                     (10.20)
                                                      dt
276     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


and ωr , the rotor speed, is deﬁned by (10.11). Decomposing (10.19) into its real and
imaginary components, we obtain

                        dimr              − →    
                   τr         = −imr + Re is e−jρ = −imr + isd ,                      (10.21)
                          dt
                                         −→     
                                      Im is e−jρ           isq
                            ω = ωr +               = ωr +        .                      (10.22)
                                          τrimr          τrimr

    Equations (10.20)–(10.22) describe the machine dynamics in the rotor-ﬁeld co-
ordinates [43]. Equation (10.21) represents a ﬁrst-order, linear system with a unity
DC gain, for which isd , imr , and τr are, respectively, the input, the output, and the
time constant. Based on (10.21), to regulate imr (which is required by (10.16) for a
linear torque control by isq ), it is sufﬁcient to regulate isd at a constant value, and this
ensures imr = isd in about 5τr . However if a faster time response is required, and if
an estimate of imr is available for feedback, a closed-loop scheme can be employed
to regulate imr through dynamic control of isd . Regulation of imr , whether open loop
or closed loop, is normally exercised (i) during the VSC system start-up process, (ii)
when the machine is at the standstill condition, and (iii) while isq is kept at zero. These
conditions ensure that the machine ﬂux is established before any torque demand. Later
in this section we present the schemes for controlling isd and isq .
    Equations (10.22) and (10.20) describe a nonlinear system that determines ρ based
on the values of ωr , isq , and imr . In turn, imr is the output of the ﬁrst-order system of
(10.21). This combination is illustrated in Figure 10.3 and is called a ﬂux observer
or a ﬂux model [43]. The ﬂux observer of Figure 10.3 receives isd , isq , and ωr as
inputs, and delivers imr , ρ, and ω. Current components isd and isq are the outputs of
an abc- to dq-frame transformer (Fig. 10.1), for which the angle, ρ, is provided by
the ﬂux observer; ρ is also required for the pulse-width modulation (PWM) signal
generator (see Fig. 8.17 for details). The ﬂux observer also delivers imr and ω. The
former output can be used as a feedback signal for ﬂux regulation, while the latter
output is utilized in a feed-forward compensation strategy to decouple the dynamics
of isd and isq ; these will be detailed in the next subsection.


                                                   Flux observer

         abc
                                                                                          iˆmr
 isa
                 isd         1        iˆmr        τ r îmr                    ω
                                                                                  VCO
 isb                                         τr              (·)–1   x            兰       ρ
                 isq       τr s + 1
 isc        dq
                                                                                          ω

           ρ                                                             ωr

FIGURE 10.3 Schematic diagram of rotor-ﬂux observer for the squirrel-cage asynchronous
machine.
                                      CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                       277


                Flux/torque                 dq-axis current    Machine dynamics
               compensators                   dynamics      in rotor-field coordinate

 iˆmr-ref                               isdref             isd        1
                           Kλ(s)                  Gi(s)                              iˆmr
                    –                                             τr s + 1

                21 + σr                 isqref             isq                       3 Lm
    Teref                                         Gi(s)                       x                      Te
                3 Lm                                                                 21 + σr


                               iˆmr
 From flux model
FIGURE 10.4 Control block diagram of the vector-controlled squirrel-cage asynchronous
machine in rotor-ﬁeld coordinates.

   It is noted that the ﬂux observer of Figure 10.3 requires ωr as an input, obtained
from a speed sensor. The ﬂux observer can, however, be constructed based on an
alternative approach in which ωr is not required, but Vsdq and isdq are the inputs. This
type of ﬂux observer delivers imr , ρ, and ωr as the outputs;2 each type of ﬂux observer
has its own merits and demerits [43, 89, 90], and further details are outside the scope
of this text.

10.3.1.2 Machine Vector Control in Rotor-Field Coordinates Figure 10.4 depicts
a block diagram of a scheme for vectorial control of the squirrel-cage asynchronous
machine, in the rotor-ﬁeld coordinates. Figure 10.4 illustrates that the ﬂux compen-
sator Kλ (s) processes the error imr-ref − imr and issues the reference command for
the d-axis current control loop, that is, isdref . imr-ref is a constant set point, and imr
is obtained from the ﬂux observer of Figure 10.3. Kλ (s), in its simplest form, is
a proportional-integral (PI) compensator whose parameters can be tuned for a fast
closed-loop response. Due to the large rotor time constant, isdref and isd assume large
transient values if the ﬂux regulation loop is fast. This, however, does not overload
the machine or the VSC, since ﬂux regulation normally takes place during the start-
up process of the VSC system, when isq = 0. If a fast closed-loop response is not
required, the ﬂux compensator is omitted and isdref is assigned a constant value, that
is, the desired steady-state value of imr ; then, isd will settle at this value in about 5τr .
    Figure 10.4 also illustrates the machine torque control loop. Based on (10.16),
                                Lm 
the machine torque is 23 ( 1+σ     r
                                     )imr times isq . Therefore, as Figure 10.4 shows, the
reference value for the q-axis current controller, isqref , is determined by dividing Teref
         Lm 
by 23 ( 1+σ r
              )imr , where imr can be either obtained from a ﬂux observer or assigned a
constant value. It can be argued that the torque controller part of Figure 10.4 is an open-
loop scheme and therefore not adequately robust to model uncertainties. However,

2 The ﬂux observer of Figure 10.3 is also known as current model, whereas the other type is referred to as

voltage model. The names are, however, not descriptive.
278       VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


it should be noted that Teref is often either the output of another compensator or
the product of an inherent feedback loop. An example of the former is a variable-
speed motor drive where Teref is determined by a speed (or position) control loop
that regulates ωr (or θr ). An example of the latter is a variable-speed wind-power unit
where Teref is set to be proportional to ωr2 . In both cases, ωr is related to Te and thus
the loop is closed.
    The ﬂux regulator and torque controller parts of Figure 10.4 issue the commands
isdref and isqref which, in turn, control isd and isq based on an inherently, nonlinear,
two-input-two-output system. The next subsection shows that by proper control
and feed-forward compensation techniques, one can transform the system into two
decoupled, single-input–single-output (SISO), linear time-invariant subsystems,
each characterized by a ﬁrst-order transfer function, Gi (s) (Fig. 10.4); one subsystem
relates isd to isdref whereas the other subsystem relates isq to isqref . We will also
show that by proper selection of parameters of (d- and q-axis) compensators, one
can make the time constant of Gi (s) arbitrarily small.

10.3.1.3 Machine Current Control by VSC System As discussed in the previous
subsection, the machine ﬂux and torque are controlled, respectively, by isd and isq .
However, the VSC can only control the stator voltage.3 Therefore, one must ﬁrst
develop mathematical expressions to relate isd and isq to Vsd and Vsq .
   The stator terminal voltage and current are related based on (10.1) and (10.3).
                 →
                 −                                          →
                                                            −
Substituting for ir from (10.14) in (10.3), and then for λs from the resultant in
(10.1), we obtain
                                                       
             d (1 + σs )(1 + σr ) − 1 −
                                      →      1  jρ         →
                                                            −      →
                                                                   −
          Lm                          is +        imr e   = Vs − Rs is .                   (10.23)
             dt       1 + σr               1 + σr

Deﬁning the machine total leakage factor, σ, as [43]

                                                    1
                                 σ =1−                         ,                           (10.24)
                                            (1 + σr )(1 + σs )

we can rewrite (10.23) as
                      →
                      −
                     d is                        d # jρ $ −→      →
                                                                   −
      Lm σ (1 + σs )      + Lm (1 − σ) (1 + σs )    imr e = Vs − Rs is .                   (10.25)
                      dt                         dt

Dividing both sides of (10.25) by Rs , we deduce
                         →
                         −
                        d is             d # jρ $   1− → −  →
                    στs      + (1 − σ)τs    imr e  =    Vs − is ,                          (10.26)
                         dt              dt          Rs

3 The VSC can directly control the stator current if a hysteresis-band current-control strategy is
employed rather than the PWM strategy. The main disadvantage of the method is the variable switching
frequency.
                               CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                  279

where τs is the stator time constant and deﬁned as

                                          Lm (1 + σs )
                                   τs =                .                            (10.27)
                                              Rs
                  →
                  −                       →
                                          −
Substituting for is = (isd + isq )ejρ and Vs = (Vsd + Vsq )ejρ in (10.26), calculating
the derivatives, and multiplying both sides of the resultant by e−jρ , we obtain

        disdq                                                     dimr   1
  στs         + isdq = −jστs ωisdq − j(1 − σ)τs ωimr − (1 − σ)τs       +    Vsdq ,
         dt                                                         dt    Rs
                                                                                    (10.28)

where ω = dρ/dt and we have employed fdq as a compact representation for fd + jfq .
Decomposing (10.28) into real and imaginary components, we deduce
                              
                     disd                              dimr   1
                στs       + isd = στs ωisq − (1 − σ)τs       +    Vsd ,             (10.29)
                      dt                                 dt    Rs
                              
                     disq                                        1
                 στs      + isq = −στs ωisd − (1 − σ)τs ωimr +    Vsq .            (10.30)
                      dt                                        Rs

Equations (10.29) and (10.30) represent a nonlinear system for which Vsd and Vsq are
inputs, and isd and isq are outputs (and also the state variables). Based on (10.29) and
(10.30), dynamics of isd and isq are coupled. Moreover, the system is nonlinear due to
the terms ωisd , ωisq , and ωimr , in view of the fact that ω and imr are both functions of
isd and isq . This nonlinearity can be avoided in the control if two new control inputs,
ud and uq , are deﬁned as

                                                   dimr   1
                      ud = στs ωisq − (1 − σ)τs          +    Vsd ,                 (10.31)
                                                     dt    Rs
                                                              1
                      uq = −στs ωisd − (1 − σ)τs ωimr +         Vsq .              (10.32)
                                                              Rs

Substituting for Vsd and Vsq in (10.29) and (10.30), from (10.31) and (10.32), we
obtain
                                            
                                   disd
                               στs      + isd = ud ,                      (10.33)
                                    dt
                                            
                                   disq
                               στs      + isq = uq .                      (10.34)
                                    dt

Equations (10.33) and (10.34) represent two decoupled ﬁrst-order subsystems with
unity DC gains. The ﬁrst subsystem controls isd by ud whereas the second subsystem
280     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                                                       Stator dynamics
                           Compensator
   isdref                ed          ud                      1
                                   k(s)                   στs s + 1                isd
                        –


                         eq                    uq             1
   isqref                          k(s)                                            isq
                       –                                  στs s + 1

FIGURE 10.5 Control block diagram for stator current control, based on (10.33) and (10.34).


controls isq via uq . In turn, ud and uq are obtained from two corresponding PI com-
pensators, as illustrated by Figure 10.5. One compensator processes isdref − isd and
provides ud , whereas the other one processes isqref − isq and provides uq . Parameters
of the compensators can be determined based on the block diagrams of Figure 10.5.
Let us assume

                                            kp s + ki
                                   k(s) =             .                            (10.35)
                                                s

If parameters kp and ki are

                                               στs
                                       kp =        ,                               (10.36)
                                                τi
                                               1
                                        ki =      ,                                (10.37)
                                               τi

then d- and q-axis current-control loops assume the following, ﬁrst-order, transfer
functions:

                               Isd (s)                  1
                                         = Gi (s) =          ,                     (10.38)
                              Isdref (s)            τi s + 1
                               Isq (s)                  1
                                         = Gi (s) =          ,                     (10.39)
                              Isqref (s)            τi s + 1

where the time constant τi is a design choice. Equations (10.38) and (10.39) corres-
pond to the middle outlined part of the block diagram of Figure 10.4. The actual
                              CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                  281

control signals Vsd and Vsq are calculated based on (10.31) and (10.32), as
                                %                             &
                                                        dimr
                     Vsd = Rs ud − στs ωisq + (1 − σ)τs         ,                   (10.40)
                                                          dt
                                                            
                     Vsq = Rs uq + στs ωisd + (1 − σ)τs ωimr ,                     (10.41)

 where the signals imr and ω are obtained from the ﬂux observer of Figure 10.3.
     Selection of compensator(s) parameters based on (10.36) and (10.37) results in
 cancellation of the plant pole p = −1/στs by the PI compensator zero. Lm and σ
 are obtained from measurements, subject to errors. Furthermore, Rs signiﬁcantly
 changes with the machine temperature. Hence, στs is not precisely known and the
 pole cancellation will not be perfect. A similar concern arises with respect to (10.40)
 and (10.41) where not only στs is uncertain but Rs is also subject to uncertainties and
 variations due to the temperature changes. However, compensator design based on
 the machine nominal parameters often renders the compensations effective, and the
 resultant closed-loop subsystems can still be characterized by the ﬁrst-order transfer
 functions of (10.38) and (10.39).
     Figure 10.6 illustrates implementation of the dq-frame current-control scheme that
 receives isdref and isqref from the ﬂux and torque compensators (Fig. 10.4), and imr and
 ω from the ﬂux observer (Fig. 10.3). Then, Vsd and Vsq , which are to be reproduced
 by the VSC, are calculated based on (10.40) and (10.41). To compensate for the
 VSC voltage conversion gain, md and mq are calculated by dividing Vsd and Vsq by
 VDC /2, and delivered to the PWM signal generator (Fig. 8.17) to generate the gating
 pulses. Since, the machine is interfaced with the VSC via a three-wire connection,
 the third-harmonic injected PWM can be adopted to permit a lower DC-bus voltage.
     Figure 10.6 shows that the controller implementation is slightly modiﬁed with
 respect to (10.40); the term (1 − σ)τs dimr /dt is omitted from the expression for Vsd .
 The reason is to avoid differentiation and its associated noise-amplifying character-
 istic. This, however, poses no issue since, except during the system start-up process,
imr is regulated at a constant value and thus (the average of) dimr /dt is zero.

 10.3.1.4 Machine Magnetizing Current In previous sections, we presented the
 rotor-ﬁeld oriented control of the asynchronous machine by introducing the ﬁctitious
 current component imr , (10.13). Based on (10.16) we also showed that the machine
 electrical torque is proportional to the product of imr and isq . Thus, if imr is kept
 constant, the torque can be linearly controlled by isq . In this section, we show that imr
 is equivalent to the machine magnetizing current [43], and thus its reference value
imr−ref must also be set at the machine nominal magnetizing current.
    The magnetizing current of a squirrel-cage machine can be calculated based on the
 machine steady-state equivalent circuit of Figure A.3, which, for ease of reference, is
 repeated as Figure 10.7. Figure 10.7 shows that if ωr = ω, that is, if the machine rotor
 speed is equal to the stator frequency, then ir = 0 and the stator current is equal to
 the magnetizing current, that is, is = im . Assuming a negligible voltage drop across
282     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                          isd
                                   dq-frame current controllers


                              – ed                 ud
           isdref                        k(s)                Rs                 md
                                                         –

                                  στs
 From flux/torque
  compensators                                                               To PWM signal generator
                                                                                  (Fig. 8.17)

                                  στs

         isqref                   eq               uq
                                         k(s)                Rs                 mq
                              –
                                               (1−σ)τs


                         isq                                      VDC
                     ω                  iˆmr                       2
                     Flux observer
                       (Fig. 10.3)

FIGURE 10.6 Implementation of d- and q-axis current controllers for asynchronous machine.



Rs , based on Figure 10.7, we deduce

                                              |Vs |
                     |is | = |im | ≃                    ,         if ω = ωr ,                (10.42)
                                          (1 + σs )Lm ω



               is   Rs        jσsLmω                jσr Lmω            ir'
       +                 +                                         +                Rr
                                                                                  ω − ωr
      Vs                 jωλs                     jL mω       jω λ 'r           (   ω
                                                                                             )
                                                  im
       –                  –                                        –
FIGURE 10.7 Steady-state equivalent circuit of the asynchronous machine with short-
circuited rotor (see Appendix A for details).
                                  CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                  283

where |is | is the stator peak current and |Vs | is the stator line-to-neutral peak voltage.
                                                             /
The stator peak current can be expressed as |is | = is = i2 + i2sq . Thus, (10.42) can
                                                                      sd
be rewritten as
                              √ # Vs−ll $          5
          /                    2 √                     2     Vs−ll
                                      3
              i2sd + i2sq ≃                    =                       ,   if ω = ωr ,   (10.43)
                              (1 + σs )Lm ω            3 (1 + σs )Lm ω

 where Vs−ll is the stator, line-to-line, rms voltage. Based on (10.21), in a steady state
imr = isd . Moreover, based on (10.22), ωr = ω corresponds to isq = 0. Thus,
                          /
                           i2sd + i2sq = isd = imr ,        if ω = ωr .                 (10.44)

Comparing (10.44) and (10.43), we conclude
                                           5
                                  imr ≃       2     Vs−ll
                                                                .                        (10.45)
                                               3 (1 + σs )Lm ωr

 That is, imr is equivalent to the machine magnetizing current (peak value). Therefore,
imr−ref must be set at the machine nominal magnetizing current, that is, corresponding
 to the rated voltage and ωr = ω0 , as
                                            5
                               imr−ref =        2      Vsn
                                                                  ,                      (10.46)
                                                 3 (1 + σs )Lm ω0

where Vsn is the nominal stator line-to-line rms voltage and ω0 is the machine nominal
frequency.
   The following example illustrates operation of the variable-frequency VSC system
of Figure 10.1 controlling a squirrel-cage asynchronous machine.

   EXAMPLE 10.1               Vector Control of Asynchronous Machine

   Consider the variable-frequency VSC system of Figure 10.1. The machine is
   a 1.68 MW, wound-rotor, asynchronous machine whose rotor terminals are
   short circuited. The machine parameters are given in Table 10.1 [53]. The VSC
   is a three-level NPC with a capacitive voltage divider (Fig. 6.18). The third-
   harmonic injected PWM strategy with a switching frequency of fs = 1680 Hz
   is adopted for the VSC. The capacitance of each DC-side capacitor is 2C =
   19250 ␮F. The voltages of the capacitors are equalized by the partial DC-side
   voltage balancer discussed in Section 6.7. The net DC-bus voltage is VDC =
   3500 V. The on-state resistance of each switch cell is about 1.0 m. Thus,
   the effective internal resistance of each phase of the VSC is approximately
   ron = 2 × 1.0 = 2 m, which is considerably smaller than Rs and ignored
   in the control design process. If a time constant of τi = 3.0 ms is desired
284    VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


           TABLE 10.1     Asynchronous Machine Parameters: Example 10.1

           Quantity                            Value                 Comment

           Nominal power               2250 hp (1.678 MW)
           Nominal voltage           2300 V (line-to-line rms)          Vsn
           Nominal frequency                377 rad/s                   ω0
           Rs                                29 m
           Rr                                22 m
           Lm                               34.6 mH
           Ls                               35.2 mH
           Lr                               35.2 mH
           σs                                0.0173
           σr                                0.0173
           σ                                 0.0337
           τs                                1.213 s
           τr                                  1.6 s


  for the current controllers, one obtains kp = 13.6 and ki = 333 s−1 based on
  (10.36) and (10.37). The transfer function of the ﬂux compensator is Kλ (s) =
  180(s + 0.625)/s, and imr−ref is set to 141 A, based on (10.46). Figures 10.8–
  10.11 illustrate the response of the variable-frequency VSC system to a constant-
  torque free acceleration, that is, no external mechanical torque is exerted.
      Initially, the machine is stalled, all the controllers are disabled, and the PWM
  gating signals are blocked. At t = 0.1 s, the controllers are enabled and the gating
  signals are released. Thus, to regulate imr , the ﬂux compensator steps up isdref
  (Fig. 10.8(a)), which is rapidly tracked by isd . Figure 10.8(a) also shows that
  isdref is limited to 1200 A to prevent exposure of the machine and the VSC to
  an over-current condition. While isd = 1200 A, imr rises toward its reference
  value (Fig. 10.8(b)) at a fairly low speed due to the large rotor time constant.
  At t = 0.305 s, imr reaches the set point of 141 A (Fig. 10.8(b)), and the ﬂux
  controller reduces isdref (and therefore isd ) to about 141 A (Fig. 10.8(a)); imr ,
  isdref , and isd become equal in the steady state. Figure 10.8(c) illustrates that
  isqref is set at zero while the machine ﬂux is being regulated. Consequently, the
  machine torque and rotor also remain at zero (Fig. 10.8(d) and (e)).
      At t = 0.4 s, isqref is stepped to 1200 A. Thus, isq and Te quickly track
  their respective reference values, as Figures 10.8(c) and (d) illustrate. Once Te
  becomes nonzero, the machine starts to move and ωr increases linearly with
  time (Fig. 10.8(e)). The reason is that, except for the ﬁrst few milliseconds when
  isq changes exponentially, Te assumes a constant value.
      Figures 10.9(a) and (b) provide a closer look at isq and Te around t = 0.4 s.
  Figure 10.9(a) shows that the step response of isq is a ﬁrst-order exponential
  time function that reaches its steady-state value in about 15 ms, that is, 5τi .
  Figure 10.9(b) shows that Te is proportional to isq and thus follows the same
  pattern of variation. It should be noted that the waveforms of isq and Te are
  identical in their per-unit terms.
                                 CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                    285

                1200 (a)                                                          i sdref
 i sd (A)


                 800                                                              i sdr
                 400
                   0

                 200 (b)
                 150
 i mr (A)




                 100                                                               i mref
                  50
                   0                                                               i mr
                 −50
                1500
                1000 (c)
 i sq (A)




                 500                                                              i sqref
                   0                                                              i sq
                −500
              12000
 Te (N m)




               9000 (d)
               6000
               3000
                  0

                 400
 ωr (rad/s)




                 300 (e)
                 200
                 100
                   0
                −100
                    0      0.1        0.2          0.3         0.4         0.5               0.6
                                                time (s)

FIGURE 10.8 Response of the variable-frequency VSC system of Example 10.1 to free
acceleration.

           Figures 10.10(a)–(d) illustrate the frequency of the VSC system, the angle for
        abc- to dq-frame transformation, the PWM modulating signal, and the stator
        current. Figures 10.10(a) and (b) illustrate that from t = 0.1 to 0.4 s when
        ωr and isq are both zero, ω is zero and ρ remains unchanged. Therefore, the
        modulating signal and the stator current are DC waveforms, as illustrated by

                1200 (a)
                1000
                 800
     i sq (A)




                 600
                 400                                                             i sqref
                 200                                                             i sq
                   0

              10000
                     (b)
               8000
 Te (N m)




               6000
               4000
               2000
                  0
                 0.395     0.4      0.405         0.41       0.415        0.42             0.425
                                                time (s)

FIGURE 10.9 Zoomed waveforms of the q-axis stator current and machine torque;
Example 10.1.
286                    VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                       400
                           (a)
                       300
     ω (rad/s)


                       200
                       100
                         0
                      −100

               6.2832 (b)
               4.7124
ρ (rad)




               3.1416
               1.5708
                    0


                         1 (c)
                       0.5
          m aug-abc




                         0
                      −0.5
                       −1

                1500 (d)
                1000
  i sabc (A)




                 500
                   0
                −500
               −1000
               −1500
                    0            0.1       0.2        0.3          0.4          0.5          0.6
                                                   time (s)

FIGURE 10.10 Waveforms of the stator frequency, dq-frame synchronization angle, modu-
lating signals, and stator current; Example 10.1.



       Figures 10.10(c) and (d). Figure 10.10(d) also shows that from t = 0.1 to 0.4 s,
                                                                                       →
                                                                                       −
       ib = ic = −ia /2; this is consistent with isq = 0, in view of isd + jisq = is e−ρ ,
       →
       −
        is = (2/3)[ia + ej(2π/3) ib + ej(4π/3) ic ], and ρ = 0. It is interesting to note that,
       from t = 0.1 to 0.4 s, the VSC system maintains DC currents in the machine
       stator windings to regulate the ﬂux.
           From t = 0.4 s onward when isq and ωr rise, ω increases accordingly, as
       Figure 10.10(a) shows. Since isq > 0, ω is slightly larger than ωr , as understood
       from (10.22). Figure 10.10(b) illustrates that ρ and its slope increase as ω
       increases, so does the frequency of the modulating signal and that of the stator
       current, as Figures 10.10(c) and (d) show. Figure 10.10(d) illustrates that the
       amplitude of isabc is constant after t = 0.4 s. The reason is that isd and isq are
       both constants during the foregoing time interval. However, the amplitude of
       maug−abc increases with ω. This is expected due to the dependence of Vsd and
       Vsq on ω, based on (10.40) and (10.41).
           Figures 10.11(a) and (b), respectively, show the machine electrical power,
       Pe = Te ωr , and (the average of) the VSC DC-side power, PDC = is VDC (see
       Fig. 10.1). From t = 0.1 to 0.4 s, Pe = 0 (Fig. 10.11(a)), while PDC assumes a
       small positive value (Fig. 10.11(b)). Pe is zero since Te = 0 over that period of
       time. PDC is nonzero since isd = / 0 from t = 0.1 to 0.4 s; thus, a small amount
                                 CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                287

            3000
            2500 (a)
            2000
 Pe (kW)



            1500
            1000
             500
               0


            3000
            2500 (b)
 PDC (kW)




            2000
            1500
            1000
             500
               0
                       0.1          0.2           0.3         0.4          0.5          0.6
                                                time (s)

FIGURE 10.11 Waveforms of the machine electric power and the VSC DC-side power during
free acceleration; Example 10.1.


       of power is drawn from the DC-side voltage source to compensate for the stator
       resistive losses. After t = 0.4 s, when ωr increases linearly and Te is constant,
       Pe and PDC increase linearly, as Figures 10.11(a) and (b) illustrate. Due to the
       stator and rotor resistive losses, PDC is slightly larger than Pe .
           Rapid torque control of an AC machine can be utilized to control the power
       exchange between the mechanical load/source interfaced with the machine and
       the entity interfaced with the VSC DC side. Figure 10.12 illustrates the per-
       formance of the variable-frequency VSC system of Example 10.1 when the
       machine torque is suddenly switched, at t = 0.7 s, from zero to a proﬁle char-
       acterized by Teref = Peref (t)/ωr (t) where Peref = −1350 kW. Consequently,
       Te becomes negative and ωr starts to drop from its predisturbance value of 340
       rad/s (Fig. 10.12(a) and (b)). As ωr decreases, (the absolute value of) Teref
       and Te become larger. Thus, the stator current increases (Fig. 10.12(c)). Figure
       10.12(d) illustrates that Pe settles at −1350 kW and remains constant thereafter.
       Figure 10.12(e) shows that PDC exhibits a similar pattern of variations but, due
       to losses, is slightly smaller (in absolute value) than Pe . Since PDC is negative,
       about 1350 kW is drawn from the machine inertia and transferred to the DC
       voltage source.
           A variable-frequency VSC system that is controlled with the foregoing op-
       erational strategy can be used as a ﬂywheel energy storage system to level out
       power ﬂuctuations caused by another energy conversion system. For example,
       the ﬂywheel energy storage system has been proposed for mitigation of power
       ﬂuctuations caused by wind-power units [91]. A ﬂywheel system can achieve
       this goal by rapid conversion of the machine kinetic energy to the electric
       power. If the DC-side voltage source in Figure 10.1 is realized by a controlled
       DC-voltage power port (Fig. 8.21, Section 8.6), the machine kinetic energy is
       transferred to the AC system that is interfaced with the controlled DC-voltage
       power port. If a higher moment of inertia is provided, the VSC system can
288             VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


              2000
  Te (N m)


                 0
             −2000
             −4000   (a)
             −6000
               350
ωr (rad/s)




               330
               310
               290
               270   (b)
               250
              1000
 isabc (A)




               500
                 0
              −500   (c)
             −1000
                 0
 Pe (kW)




              −300
              −650
             −1000
             −1350   (d)

                 0
 PDC (kW)




              −300
              −650
             −1000
             −1350 (e)
                 0.675       0.7         0.725              0.75       0.775           0.8
                                                 time (s)

FIGURE 10.12 Waveforms of the machine electric power and VSC DC-side power in the
ﬂywheel mode; Example 10.1.


       maintain the power ﬂow for a longer period of time. It should be noted that a
       ﬂywheel energy storage system can maintain the power only until the machine
       torque and current limits are reached; thereafter, the power linearly drops as ωr
       decreases to zero. To bring ωr back to its rated value, Teref must be maintained
       at a positive value, for example, via a speed regulation loop.


10.3.2          Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Machine
10.3.2.1 Machine Model in Stator-Field Coordinates In this section, we present
the controls for the variable-frequency VSC system of Figure 10.2 to control a doubly-
fed asynchronous machine. Figure 10.2 illustrates that the machine stator is directly
connected to an AC system with the nominal frequency ω0 , whereas the rotor is in-
terfaced with the variable-frequency VSC system. The main advantage of the scheme
manifests itself when the rotor speed varies only a few percentages about the AC
system frequency, that is, ωr = ω0 ± ω. Under this condition, the ratio of the real
power ﬂowing through the rotor circuit to the total real power of the machine is pro-
portional to ω [43]. Thus, the VSC can be of a smaller power rating compared
to the machine, and most of the power is directly exchanged between the machine
stator circuit and the AC system. A practical case for the application of the system
of Figure 10.2 is the case of a variable-speed wind-power unit where the extracted
                             CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM               289

wind power can be signiﬁcantly varied if the turbine speed is controlled only over a
narrow range [86, 87]. The wind power can then be controlled (and maximized) by
changing ωr through the variable-frequency VSC system of Figure 10.2, while the
VSC handles only a small fraction of the total machine power. This application is
extensively discussed in Chapter 13.
   The model of a symmetrical three-phase AC machine, represented by (10.1)–
(10.4) and (10.9), is equally applicable to the doubly-fed asynchronous machine. Let
           →
           −
us express λs , based on (4.6), as

                                   →  jθ(t)
                                   −
                                   λs = λs e ,                                  (10.47)

where θ is the angle of the space phasor and a function of time, in general. Deﬁning
the change of variable θ(t) = ρ(t) + θr (t), we can rewrite (10.47) as

                                  →  j(ρ+θr )
                                  −
                                  λ s = λs e   ,                                (10.48)
                                              →
                                              −
where θr is the rotor angle. Substituting for λs in (10.3), from (10.48), and solving
    →
    −
for is , we obtain
                                             →
                                             −
                             → 
                             −    λs ejρ − Lm ir jθr
                             is =               e .                             (10.49)
                                   (1 + σs )Lm

                 →
                 −                                                 −
                                                                    →− → 
Substituting for is in (10.9) from (10.49), and considering that Im ir ir ∗ = 0,
we deduce
                                            #−
                             3      1          → −jρ $∗ 
                     Te =               λs Im    ir e      .               (10.50)
                             2 1 + σs

          →
          −
The term ir e−jρ represents a transformation from the αβ-frame to the dq-frame,
with ρ being the angle for transformation as indicated in Figure 10.2. Substituting for
→ −jρ
−
ir e    = ird + jirq in (10.50), we deduce
                                     
                                     3   1 
                             Te = −           λs irq .                          (10.51)
                                     2 1 + σs

Equation (10.51) indicates that the machine torque can be linearly controlled by irq ,
provided that 
              λs is regulated at a constant value.
   The mathematical equations describing the dynamics of         λs and ρ are developed
                              →
                              −                            →
                                                           −
by substituting in (10.1) for λs = λs ej(ρ+θr ) , and for is from (10.49):

                                                         →
                                                         −
                   d  j(ρ+θr )  −→        
                                             λs ejρ − Lm ir jθr
                      λs e        = Vs − R s               e .                  (10.52)
                   dt                          (1 + σs )Lm
290     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


Calculating the derivative, multiplying both sides of the resultant by e−j(ρ+θr ) , and
                 →
                 −
substituting for ir e−jρ = ird + jirq , we deduce

                    d
                     λs                                →
                                                        −
               τs       + λs     + jτs (ω + ωr ) 
                                                 λs = τs Vs e−j(ρ+θr ) + Lm irdq ,     (10.53)
                     dt

where ω = dρ/dt, ωr is the rotor speed, and τs is the stator time constant as deﬁned
by (10.27). Assume that the stator terminal voltage is sinusoidal and balanced as

                                         s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ),
                               Vsa (t) = V
                                                                
                                                             2π
                               Vsb (t) = Vs cos ω0 t + θ0 −        ,
                                                               3
                                                                
                                         s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π ,
                               Vsc (t) = V                                             (10.54)
                                                               3

where Vs is the peak value of the line-to-neutral voltage, ω0 is the AC system angular
frequency, and θ0 is the initial phase angle of the stator terminal voltage. Then, based
on (4.42), we have
                               →
                               −                 s ej(ω0 t+θ0 ) .
                               Vs = Vsα + jVsβ = V                                     (10.55)

                 →
                 −
Substituting for Vs from (10.55) in (10.53), we obtain

               d
                λs 
          τs       + λs      + jτs (ω + ωr )        s ej(ω0 t+θ0 −ρ−θr ) + Lm irdq , (10.56)
                                             λs = τs V
                dt

where fdq denotes fd + jfq . Decomposing (10.56) into real and imaginary compo-
nents, we deduce
                                                   
                                                  Vsd
                                                             
                  d
                   λs               s cos (ω0 t + θ0 − ρ − θr ) +Lm ird ,
               τs     + λs      = τs V                                                 (10.57)
                   dt
                                                           
                                                          Vsq
                                                                      
                                              s sin (ω0 t + θ0 − ρ − θr ) +Lm irq
                                           τs V
                             ω = −ωr +                                               . (10.58)
                                                             τs 
                                                                λs

Except for the presence of the terms Vsd    =V s cos(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ − θr ) and Vsq
                                                                                   =

s sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ − θr ), (10.57) and (10.58) are analogous to (10.21) and (10.22),
V
which were developed for the squirrel-cage asynchronous machine. Equation (10.57)
describes the dynamics of the stator ﬂux, whereas (10.58) formulates the rotating
                                CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                        291

speed of the dq-frame, ω, as a function of irq . Based on (10.51), irq is proportional
to the electrical torque and thus ω is also a function of the torque. Equation (10.57)
suggests that the stator ﬂux can be controlled through ird . However, in the doubly-
fed asynchronous machine,    λs is naturally regulated by the AC system and is fairly
invariant with respect to ird . This can be demonstrated by linearizing (10.57) and
(10.58) around the steady-state operating point corresponding to ird = irq = 0, as
follows.
    Let us ﬁrst introduce the following change of variable:

                                   γ = ω0 t + θ0 − ρ − θr .                                 (10.59)

Based on (10.59), we can rewrite (10.57) and (10.58) as

                             d
                              λs              s cos γ + Lm ird ,
                        τs       + λs     = τs V                                            (10.60)
                              dt

                                     dγ           s sin γ + Lm irq
                                               τs V
                                        = ω0 −                      .                       (10.61)
                                     dt                 τs 
                                                           λs

The perturbed variables are deﬁned as
                                        
                                        λs = 
                                             λs0 +      
                                                        λs ,
                                         γ = γ0 +       γ,
                                      ird =     ird ,
                                        irq =   irq .                                       (10.62)

Substituting for the perturbed variables in (10.60) and (10.61), and considering only
the ﬁrst-order terms, we deduce

             d 
               λs                #             $
        τs        +    
                       λs            s sin γ0
                              = − τs V           γ + Lm ird ,                               (10.63)
              dt

                      s                        s                                
      d γ             V                         V                         Lm
          =−              cos γ0        γ+         sin γ0      λs −                    irq , (10.64)
       dt             
                      λs0                       
                                                λ2                        τs 
                                                                             λs0
                                                 s0


where

                                                   ω0 
                                                      λs0
                                        sin γ0 =          ,                                 (10.65)
                                                    s
                                                    V
                                                    
                                                    λs0
                                        cos γ0 =         .                                  (10.66)
                                                      s
                                                   τs V
292     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


It then follows from (10.65), (10.66), and identity sin2 (·) + cos2 (·) = 1 that

                                      s
                                   τs V        Vs
                        
                        λs0 =               ≈     ,                               (10.67)
                                (τs ω0 ) + 1
                                        2      ω0
                                  τs ω0                 π
                     sin γ0 =               ≈ 1 =⇒ γ0 ≈ ,                         (10.68)
                                (τs ω0 ) + 1
                                        2               2
                                        1                 1
                    cos γ0 =                       ≈         ,                    (10.69)
                                    (τs ω0 )2 + 1       τs ω0

where the approximation is based on τs ω0  1. Based on (10.67)–(10.69), (10.63)
and (10.64) are rewritten as

                                   # $           
                d λs       1         s      Lm
                      =−        λs − V    γ−            ird ,                      (10.70)
                  dt        τs                  τs
                                                   
                 d γ     ω02         1        L m ω0
                      =        λs −       γ+               irq .                   (10.71)
                  dt     s
                         V            τs       τs Vs


Equations (10.70) and (10.71), expressed in the classical state-space form, repre-
sent a two-input–two-output linear system for which ird and irq are inputs, and
  
  λs and γ are outputs. Taking the Laplace transform from both sides of (10.70)
and (10.71), and solving for  λs (s) and γ(s), we obtain the following transfer
functions:
                      #        $#       $                #       $
                          Lm                               Lm ω0
                          τs    s + τ1s                      τs
           
           λs (s) = − #        $2         Ird (s) − #        $2          Irq (s), (10.72)
                        s + τ1s + ω02                 s + τ1s + ω02
                                  
                            Lm ω02                  #       $#         $
                                                      Lm ω0
                                s                              s + 1
                             τs V                      τV          τs
            γ(s) = − #         $2         Ird (s) + # s s $2               Irq (s), (10.73)
                        s + τ1s + ω02                  s + τ1s + ω02


where s denotes the complex frequency. Inspection of (10.72) and (10.73)
reveals that the transfer functions   λs (s)/ Ird (s), 
                                                        λs (s)/ Irq (s), γ(s)/ Ird (s),
and γ(s)/ Irq (s) have small DC gains. For example, based on the parame-
ters of Table 10.1,   λs (0)/ Ird (0) and   λs (0)/ Irq (0) are, respectively, equal to
             −4
−1.65 × 10 Wb/kA and −7.56 × 10−2 Wb/kA for the machine of Example 10.1.
Therefore, the transient and steady-state impacts of ird and irq , on       λs and γ,
are insigniﬁcant and can be ignored in our subsequent developments. This, in turn,
indicates that λs and γ can be approximated by their corresponding steady-state
                                 CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM            293

values of
                                                 s
                                                 V
                                     
                                     λs ≈ 
                                          λs0 =     ,                            (10.74)
                                                 ω0
                                                π
                                      γ ≈ γ0 = .                                 (10.75)
                                                2

   The conclusions of the foregoing mathematical analysis could have been drawn
also through the inspection of the equivalent circuit of Figure A.2. In the doubly-fed
asynchronous machine, if the stator is directly supplied from a stiff voltage source,
the voltage across the machine magnetizing inductance and thus the ﬂux are tightly
regulated since the stator resistance is relatively small. Consequently, to change the
voltage of the magnetizing branch, a large rotor current would be required. Thus,
although λs is perturbed as irq is changed for torque control, there is practically no
need to regulate 
                 λs via ird as deviations are insigniﬁcant. Hence, ird can be set to zero
to keep the VSC current at minimum.
   Substituting for 
                    λs ≈ V s /ω0 in (10.51), we can express the machine torque as

                                           s
                                       3     V
                            Te = −                   irq .                       (10.76)
                                       2 (1 + σs )ω0

Substituting for γ ≈ π/2 in (10.59), taking derivative from both sides of the resultant,
and solving for ω = dρ/dt, we deduce

                                        dρ
                                   ω=      ≈ ω0 − ωr .                           (10.77)
                                        dt

Equation (10.77) indicates that the rotational speed of the dq-frame, ω, is approxi-
mately equal to the difference between the AC system frequency and the rotor speed.
ω is used for decoupling and feed-forward compensations in the d- and q-axis current-
control loops of the VSC system.

10.3.2.2 Machine Vector Control in Stator-Field Coordinates As explained in
the previous section, the machine torque in the variable-frequency VSC system of
Figure 10.2 can be linearly controlled through irq , (10.76). It was also discussed that
ird has an insigniﬁcant impact on the machine ﬂux and can be treated as a free control
variable. The aforementioned control strategy is illustrated by the block diagram
of Figure 10.13. Figure 10.13 shows that the torque command Teref is divided by
− 3Vs
  2(1+σs )ω0 to provide i    . Although i
                         rqref                can be assigned any value within the
                                            rdref
range of the VSC current rating, it preferably should be set to zero, as Figure 10.13
suggests, to keep the VSC AC-side current at minimum. This, in turn, reduces the
VSC and rotor power losses and enhances the overall system efﬁciency. The dq-
frame current-control scheme ensures that ird and irq rapidly track their corresponding
reference commands. Thus, ird is regulated at zero, whereas irq is varied according
to the torque demand.
294      VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                                        dq-axis current
                                          dynamics

                                   irdref                    ird
                          0                        Gi(s)                 Machine dynamics
         Torque compensator                                          in stator-field coordinates

               2 (1 + σ s)ω 0      irqref                    irq             3     Vˆ s
 Teref     −                                       Gi(s)                 −                         Te
               3     Vˆs
                                                                             2 (1 + σ s)ω 0

FIGURE 10.13 Control block diagram of the vector-controlled doubly-fed asynchronous
machine in stator-ﬁeld coordinates.


    Figure 10.2 illustrates that the VSC system is controlled in a dq-frame that is syn-
chronized to angle ρ. We require ρ to (i) obtain ird and irq as feedback signals for the
dq-frame current controllers and (ii) transform md and mq to mabc (t) for the PWM
signal generator. ρ is not directly available and must be obtained from a ﬂux observer.
The block diagram of a ﬂux observer that is based on (10.57) and (10.58) is shown
in Figure 10.14. The ﬂux observer of Figure 10.14 is similar to its counterpart for the
squirrel-cage asynchronous machine (Fig. 10.3). The ﬂux observer of Figure 10.14
is, however, more complicated than that of Figure 10.3 since calculations of Vsd     =
s cos(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ − θr ) and Vsq
V                                      =V s sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ − θr ) require abc- to
dq-frame transformations, in addition to the one that is required for the irabc to
irdq transformation. Moreover, as discussed in the previous section, dynamics of
ω = dρ/dt and   λs are fairly insensitive to ird and irq . Consequently, at the system
start-up when both ρ and ω = dρ/dt are in zero-state conditions, if ωr is considerably
different from ω0 , the ﬂux observer may enter a limit cycle that takes a long time to
fade away. Depending on initial values, the ﬂux observer may never reach a steady
state. The observer start-up issue is similar to that of the phase-locked loop (PLL)
discussed in Section 8.3.4.
    An alternative ﬂux observer that does not encounter the limit-cycle issue of the
observer of Figure 10.14 can be developed based on (10.1) and (10.48). Considering
     →
     −
that f = fα + jfβ , (10.1) can be decomposed into
                                  dλsα
                                       = Vsα − Rs isα ,                                       (10.78)
                                   dt
                                  dλsβ
                                       = Vsβ − Rs isβ .                                       (10.79)
                                   dt

Integrating both sides of (10.78) and (10.79), we deduce
                                         t
                                λsα =           (Vsα − Rs isα )dτ,                            (10.80)
                                            0
                                         t
                                λsβ =           (Vsβ − Rs isβ )dτ.                            (10.81)
                                            0
                             CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM              295




FIGURE 10.14 Block diagram of stator-ﬂux model (ﬂux observer) for the doubly-fed asyn-
chronous machine.



Then, based on (10.48), we have

                                    →
                                     −
                            λs ejρ = λs e−jθr
                                     0           1
                                   = λsα + jλsβ e−jθr ,                        (10.82)
                                                  
                                             λsd +jλsq


where λsα and λsβ are the outcomes of (10.80) and (10.81), respectively. Equation
(10.82) represents an αβ- to dq-frame transformation for which the angle is θr . There-
fore,

                                
                                λs ejρ = λsd + jλsq ,                        (10.83)

where λsd and λsq are the outputs of the αβ- to dq-frame transformation. Decomposing
(10.83) into real and imaginary components, we conclude
                                         /
                                  
                                  λs =       λ2    2
                                              sd + λsq ,                       (10.84)

                                               λsq
                                sin ρ = /                  ,                   (10.85)
                                             λ2    2
                                              sd + λsq

                                               λsd
                               cos ρ = /                   .                   (10.86)
                                             λ2    2
                                              sd + λsq
296     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM




FIGURE 10.15 Block diagram of an alternative stator-ﬂux model (ﬂux observer) for the
doubly-fed asynchronous machine.



    Figure 10.15 illustrates a block diagram of the alternative ﬂux observer. The ﬂux
observer of Figure 10.15 is based on (10.80)–(10.82), and (10.84)–(10.86). The out-
lined part of the ﬂux observer of Figure 10.15 illustrates α- and β-axis integrators. To
prevent drifts at the outputs of the integrators, which are mainly due to offsets and/or
numerical errors, each integrator is augmented with an internal feedback loop. The
internal feedback is closed through a ﬁrst-order low-pass ﬁlter with the unity gain and
a large time constant, τ. The low-pass ﬁlter feeds any DC component of the integrator
output back to its input. Thus, an offset component at the input cannot result in a drift
at the output. On the other hand, since τ is large, the feedback path is effectively open
at the AC system frequency and the loop gain is equivalent to an integrator.
    The ﬂux observer of Figure 10.15 is an appropriate choice for the doubly-fed
asynchronous machine, as it is simple, robust, and not subject to complicated start-up
transients. Moreover, it deals with the relatively clean signals Vsabc , isabc , and θr . The
ﬂux observer of Figure 10.15, with minor modiﬁcations, may also be employed for
the squirrel-cage asynchronous machine and is referred to as the voltage model in the
technical literature [43]. However, for the squirrel-cage machine, the proper operation
of the ﬂux observer requires that the machine speed be adequately higher than zero.
The reason is that at low speeds Vsabc , which is a switched waveform in case of the
squirrel-cage machine, has a small fundamental component resulting in inaccurate
integration. This issue does not exist for the doubly-fed asynchronous machine since
Vsabc is a relatively clean sinusoidal voltage supported by the AC system.

10.3.2.3 Machine Current Control by VSC As discussed in the previous section,
the torque of the doubly-fed asynchronous machine is controlled by irq , while ird
can be regulated at any value within the VSC rating (Fig. 10.13). In this section, we
present a control scheme to regulate ird and irq , respectively at irdref and irqref . Since
the VSC controls the rotor terminal voltage of the doubly-fed machine, we must relate
ird and irq to the control inputs Vrd and Vrq .
                                     CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                  297

  The rotor terminal voltages and currents are related based on (10.2) and (10.4).
                 →
                 −
Substituting for is from (10.49) in (10.4), we obtain

                               →
                               −                →
                                                −               1  jρ
                               λr = σ(1 + σr )Lm ir +                λs e ,             (10.87)
                                                              1 + σs

where σs , σr , and σ are deﬁned by (10.5), (10.6), and (10.24), respectively. Substituting
    →
    −                                                  →
                                                       −                  →
                                                                          −
for λr in (10.2) from (10.87), and substituting for ir = irdq ejρ and Vr = Vrdq ejρ in
the resultant, we ﬁnd
                                     #
              d 0       jρ
                           1     1    d  jρ $
 σ(1 + σr )Lm     irdq e +               λs e = Vrdq ejρ − Rr irdq ejρ ,                (10.88)
              dt               1 + σs dt

where fdq is a compact representation of fd + jfq . Calculating the derivatives in
(10.88) and multiplying both sides of the resultant by e−jρ /Rr , we obtain

                          
            dirdq                                   (1 − σ)τr d 
                                                                λs    (1 − σ)τr      Vrdq
      στr         + irdq       = −jστr ωirdq −                     −j          ω λs +      ,
             dt                                        Lm      dt        Lm            Rr
                                                                                        (10.89)

where τr is deﬁned by (10.18). Decomposing (10.89) into real and imaginary com-
ponents, we deduce

                                         
                             dird                            (1 − σ)τr d 
                                                                         λs   Vrd
                       στr        + ird       = στr ωirq −                  +     ,     (10.90)
                              dt                                Lm      dt    Rr
                                         
                           dirq                                (1 − σ)τr     Vrq
                       στr      + irq         = −στr ωird −             ωλs +     .     (10.91)
                            dt                                    Lm          Rr

Equations (10.90) and (10.91) represent a two-input–two-output system for which
Vrd and Vrq are inputs and ird and irq are outputs (and also the state variables). Based
on (10.90) and (10.91), dynamics of ird and irq are coupled. However, as opposed
to the case of the squirrel-cage induction machine, that is, (10.29) and (10.30), the
system can be regarded as a linear time-varying system. The reason is that    λs and ω
are almost independent of ird and irq , as indicated by (10.74) and (10.77). Dynamics
of ird and irq can be made decoupled by introducing the two new control inputs

                                                  (1 − σ)τr d 
                                                              λs   1
                             ud = στr ωirq −                     +    Vrd ,             (10.92)
                                                     Lm      dt    Rr
                                                    (1 − σ)τr      1
                             uq = −στr ωird −                ω λs +    Vrq .            (10.93)
                                                       Lm           Rr
298    VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


Then, (10.90) and (10.91) can be expressed as

                                                       
                                           dird
                                     στr        + ird       = ud ,                 (10.94)
                                            dt
                                                       
                                           dirq
                                     στr        + irq       = uq .                 (10.95)
                                            dt

Equations (10.94) and (10.95) represent two decoupled, ﬁrst-order subsystems with
unity DC gains. The ﬁrst subsystem controls ird by ud whereas the second subsys-
tem controls irq via uq . In turn, ud and uq are delivered by two corresponding PI
compensators, as illustrated by Figure 10.16. One compensator processes irdref − ird
and provides ud ; the other compensator processes irqref − irq and provides uq . The
parameters of the compensators can be calculated based on the block diagram of
Figure 10.16, similar to the case of the squirrel-cage asynchronous machine. Let us
assume

                                                 kp s + ki
                                      k(s) =               ,                       (10.96)
                                                     s

where kp and ki are

                                                    στr
                                            kp =                                   (10.97)
                                                     τi
                                                    1
                                             ki =      .                           (10.98)
                                                    τi



                                                            Rotor dynamics
                             Compensator
                            ed                    ud             1
        irdref                        k(s)                                   ird
                         –                                    στr s + 1


                            eq                      uq           1
        irqref                        k(s)                                   irq
                        –                                     στr s + 1

FIGURE 10.16 Block diagrams of the rotor current-control loops, based on (10.94) and
(10.95).
                              CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                 299

Then, the d- and q-axis current-control loops are described by the following, ﬁrst-
order, transfer functions:
                              Ird (s)                  1
                                        = Gi (s) =          ,                      (10.99)
                             Irdref (s)            τi s + 1
                              Irq (s)                  1
                                        = Gi (s) =          ,                    (10.100)
                             Irqref (s)            τi s + 1

where the time constant τi is a design choice. Equations (10.99) and (10.100) corre-
spond to the middle outlined part of the block diagram of Figure 10.13. Vrd and Vrq
are computed based on (10.92) and (10.93) as
                              %                                &
                                                (1 − σ)τr d 
                                                            λs
                   Vrd = Rr ud − στr ωirq +                      ,         (10.101)
                                                   Lm      dt
                                                             
                                                (1 − σ)τr 
                   Vrq = Rr uq + στr ωird +               ωλs .            (10.102)
                                                   Lm

   Figure 10.17 illustrates a block diagram of the dq-frame current-control scheme
that receives irdref (usually set to zero) and irqref (from the torque compensator)
(Fig. 10.13). Vrd and Vrq , which are to be reproduced by the VSC, are calculated based
on (10.101) and (10.102) for which   λs is assumed to be constant based on (10.74) and
ω is determined based on (10.77). Since, based on (5.22) and (5.23), the VSC has a
gain of VDC /2, the calculated signals Vrd and Vrq are divided by VDC /2 to yield md
and mq , respectively. The PWM signal generator (Fig. 8.17), receives md and mq and
generates the gating pulses. It should be pointed out that cos ρ and sin ρ, required for
the PWM signal generator in addition to transforming irabc to irdq , are obtained from
the ﬂux observer of Figure 10.15. Since, the machine is interfaced with the VSC via
a three-wire connection (Fig. 10.2), one is permitted to employ the third-harmonic
injected PWM strategy to allow a lower DC-bus voltage. Figure 10.17 also reveals
that the term Rr [τr (1 − σ)/Lm ]d λs /dt in expression (10.101) for Vrd is omitted in
implementation. The justiﬁcation is that   λs is fairly constant based on (10.74), and its
derivative has a negligible average value.

10.3.2.4 VSC Power Rating In this section, we show that in the VSC system of
Figure 10.2, if the doubly-fed asynchronous machine rotates at an angular speed close
to the AC system frequency ω0 , the real power that ﬂows through the rotor terminals
constitutes a small fraction of the machine total electric power and, thus, the VSC can
be of a smaller power rating compared to the machine power rating.
    Based on (4.40), the real power delivered by the VSC system to the rotor circuit is
                                                             −
                                                              →
                  3 #−
                      →       →$ −
                              −   →  3                           →∗
                                                             d λ r−
              Pr = Re V r − Rr ir ir ∗ = Re                       ir .           (10.103)
                  2                     2                     dt
300     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                             ird
                                   dq-frame current controllers

                               – e                  ud
                                     d
         irdref                          k(s)                    Rr           md
                                                             –


  Set to zero                      στr

                                                                            To PWM signal generator
                                                                                 (Fig. 8.17)
 From torque
 compensator                       στr

                                   eq                   uq
         irqref                           k(s)                   Rr           mq
                               –
                                     τ r (1 − σ )Vˆ s
                                          Lmω 0

                      ω      irq
                                                                      VDC
           ωr          –
                                                                       2

                       ω0

FIGURE 10.17 Implementation of d- and q-axis current-control loops for the doubly-fed
asynchronous machine.




                →
                −                                  →
                                                   −
Substituting for ir = irdq ejρ in (10.87), and for λr from the resultant in (10.103), we
have

                  !                                                "
         3            d                             1  jρ ∗ −jρ
  Pr =     Re             σ(1 + σr )Lm irdq ejρ +        λs e irdq e   .                   (10.104)
         2            dt                          1 + σs


Under the steady-state condition, irdq and 
                                           λs are constant and (10.104) can be
simpliﬁed to

                  !                                         "
              3                        jρ   1  jρ ∗ −jρ
         Pr = Re j σ(1 + σr )Lm irdq ωe +        λs ωe irdq e
              2                           1 + σs
               
                3   1 
            =            λs ωirq .                              (10.105)
                2 1 + σs
                               CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM            301

Based on (4.40), the apparent power exchanged with the stator circuit is

                                                →
                                                −
                      3 #−
                         →       → $−
                                 −    →             →∗
                                             3 d λ s−
               Ss =      V s − Rs i s i ∗s =         i s.                     (10.106)
                      2                      2 dt

                 →
                 −                     →
                                       −
Substituting for λs = 
                      λs ej(ρ+θr ) and is in (10.106), respectively, from (10.48) and
(10.49), we obtain


            3 d  j(ρ+θr )  λs e−j(ρ+θr ) − Lm i∗rdq e−j(ρ+θr )
        Ss =       λs e
            2 dt                         (1 + σs )Lm
                                
                 3                λs − Lm i∗rdq
           =j        (ω + ωr ) 
                               λs               .                             (10.107)
                 2                (1 + σs )Lm

The real power delivered by the AC system to the stator is

                              
                              3    1      
           Ps = Re {Ss } = −              λs (ω + ωr )irq .                   (10.108)
                              2 (1 + σs )

Based on Pe = Te ωr and (10.51), the machine electrical power can be expressed as

                                
                                3    1      
                      Pe = −                λs ωr irq .                       (10.109)
                                2 (1 + σs )

Comparing (10.105) and (10.108) with (10.109), and considering that ω = ω0 − ωr
based on (10.77), we conclude

                                             
                                           ω0
                                  Pr = 1 −       Pe ,                         (10.110)
                                           ωr
                                        
                                        ω0
                                  Ps =      Pe .                              (10.111)
                                        ωr

Based on (10.110) and (10.111), if ωr is close to ω0 , the VSC system exchanges only
a small fraction of the machine net power with the rotor; the rest of the machine power
is directly exchanged between the stator and the AC system. Thus, the VSC can be
of a fairly small power rating if the rotor speed is close to the AC system frequency.
Let us assume

                          ωr = ω0 +      ωr ,    | ωr |  ω0 ,                (10.112)
302     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


where ωr is the speed deviation from ω0 . Substituting for ωr from (10.112) in
(10.110), we deduce

                                  ⎡                                ⎤
                                                    ω0
                           Pr = ⎣1 −           #                $ ⎦ Pe
                                           ω0 1 + ωω0 r

                                                1
                              =       1−                    Pe .                     (10.113)
                                           1 + ωω0 r

If ωr  ω0 , then 1/(1 +      ωr /ω0 ) ≈ (1 −          ωr /ω0 ). Thus, (10.113) can be rewrit-
ten as
                                                    
                                                ωr
                                  Pr =                   Pe .                        (10.114)
                                               ω0

Equation (10.114) indicates that Pr is proportional to ωr , and decreases as ωr
becomes smaller. It should be noted that the real power exchanged between the
VSC system and the rotor is slightly different from Pr due to the rotor resistive
losses.
    The exchange of reactive power between the AC system and the stator is charac-
terized by

 Qs = Im {Ss }
                                    
        3      1                     3    1      
    =                 λs (ω + ωr ) −
                       2
                                                  λs (ω + ωr )ird .                  (10.115)
        2 (1 + σs )Lm                 2 (1 + σs )

Substituting for 
                 λs and ω in (10.115), from (10.74) and (10.77), we deduce

                        s2         
                  3      V            3    1      s ird .
          Qs =                     −              V                                  (10.116)
                  2 (1 + σs )Lm ω0    2 (1 + σs )

Equation (10.116) indicates that the reactive power drawn from the AC system has two
components. The ﬁrst component corresponds to the machine magnetizing current
and is constant. The second component is proportional to ird . Due to the machine large
magnetizing current, the constant component of the reactive power is signiﬁcant. As
(10.116) suggests, the constant component of the reactive power can be compensated
         s /(Lm ω0 ). This, of course, results in an increase in the AC-side current of
if ird = V
the VSC. With ird = 0, the AC-side current remains minimal at the expense of a stator
lagging power-factor.
    The following example illustrates the operation of the variable-frequency VSC
system of Figure 10.2.
                                  CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                       303

   EXAMPLE 10.2                Vector Control of Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Machine

   Consider the variable-frequency VSC system of Figure 10.2 to control a
   1.68 MW doubly-fed asynchronous machine with the parameters given in
   Table 10.1. The machine stator is directly interfaced with an AC system whose
   frequency is ω0 = 377 rad/s. The AC system is represented by a Thevenin
   equivalent circuit with a 2300-V (line-to-line, rms) voltage source and a series
   inductance of Lg = 750 ␮H. The inductance can be regarded as the leakage
   inductance of a 1.6 MVA interface transformer, corresponding to a leakage
   reactance of 0.09 per-unit (pu).
      In the VSC system of Figure 10.2, the machine rotor is controlled by a two-
   level VSC. Figure 10.18 illustrates that a three-phase switch connects the rotor
   terminals to the corresponding AC-side terminals of the VSC. At the start-up,
   the switch is open and will not be closed until the machine accelerates (by an
   external mechanical torque) and ωr lies within a narrow range about ω0 . The
   need for this mechanism can be explained as follows. Since the stator is supplied
   from the AC system,   λs is fairly constant at its nominal value and d 
                                                                           λs /dt = 0.
   Now assume that during the start-up ird and irq are both zero and ωr is small
   (zero under a standstill condition). Then, based on (10.77), ω = ω0 − ωr has a
   large value (equal to ω0 for the standstill condition). Thus, based on (10.101)
   and (10.102), Vrd = 0 whereas Vrq has a large value. Consequently, Vrabc has a
   large amplitude, and a large DC-bus voltage is required for the VSC to properly
   operate.4 However, if ωr is close to ω0 the amplitude of Vrabc is considerably
   smaller and a signiﬁcantly lower DC-bus voltage is allowed.
      In the system of Figure 10.2, the DC-bus voltage of the VSC is 1500 V.
   The VSC adopts the third-harmonic injected PWM strategy with a switching
   frequency of fs = 1620 Hz. The on-state resistance of each switch cell is about
   0.9 m, which is considerably smaller than Rr and can be ignored in the control
   design process. Assuming that a time constant of τi = 3.0 ms is desired for the
   current-control loops, based on (10.97) and (10.98) we ﬁnd kp = 17.97 and
   ki = 333 s−1 .
      Figure 10.18 also shows that a three-phase star-connected series RLC ﬁl-
   ter is connected in parallel with the machine stator terminals. This ﬁlter is to
   mitigate harmonic distortion of Vsabc , which is measured for ﬂux observation
   (Fig. 10.15). Without the ﬁlter, Vsabc includes switching voltage notches that
   may adversely impact the ﬂux observation process. The reason is that, once the
   switch is closed and the VSC is activated, the rotor terminal voltage becomes
   a switched waveform. On the other hand, the rotor and stator windings behave
   analogous to the windings of a transformer. Consequently, the rotor voltage is
   transferred to the stator circuit and, due to the AC system inductance, switching
   notches will appear at the stator terminals. The ﬁlter parameters are Rf = 20
   m, Lf = 90 ␮H, and Cf = 100 ␮F.

                             rd = 0 and Vrq = 1845 V, for ωr = 0. Therefore, the amplitude of Vrabc is
4 For this example, we ﬁnd V

1845 V in standstill. Consequently, even using the third-harmonic injected PWM, the VSC DC-bus voltage
must be at least 3210 V to avoid overmodulation.
304                   VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                                  Switch
                                              Vra ira                               AC system
                                                                                    Lg
                                                                       Vsa isa
                                                                                         +




                                                                                          –
                                             Vrb     irb
       VSC                                                             Vsb isb
                                                           Machine                        +




                                                                                          –
      system                                                           Vsc isc
                                                                                          +




                                                                                          –
                                              Vrc irc
                                                                           Lf
                                                                           Rf
                                                                           Cf

                            FIGURE 10.18 Variable-frequency VSC system of Example 10.2.



           Figure 10.19 illustrates the response of the variable-frequency VSC system
        of Figure 10.2 to a forced acceleration followed by a ﬂywheel mode of oper-
        ation. Initially, the machine is in standstill condition, the switch is open, all
        controllers are inactive, and the VSC gating pulses are blocked. Thus, the stator
        carries the magnetizing current (Fig. 10.19(a)), and the ﬂux rises (Fig. 10.19(b)).


                2500
 Vsa and isa




                1500
                   0                   Vsa (V)
               −1500        (a)        2.5i sa (A)
               −2500

                       5    (b)
            λs (Wb)




                      2.5
                       0
                  800
     irabc (A)




                  400
                    0
                 −400 (c)
                 −800
 Te (N m)




                   0
               −2000
               −4000 (d)

                     470
        ωr (rad/s)




                     377
                     300
                     150 (e)
                       0
                        0            0.1             0.2       0.3        0.4     0.5         0.6
                                                            time (s)

FIGURE 10.19 Overall response of the variable-frequency system of Figure 10.2;
Example 10.2.
                          CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM               305

Since the magnetizing branch is dominantly inductive, the stator current lags
the corresponding phase voltage by almost 90◦ . Since the rotor current is zero
(Fig. 10.19(c)), the machine generates no torque (Fig. 10.19(d)). However, a
mechanical energy source exerts a constant torque on the machine, and conse-
quently the rotor speed linearly increases (Fig. 10.19(e)).
    At t = 0.14 s, the switch is closed, the controllers are activated, and the
VSC gating pulses are unblocked. However, since Teref (and thus irqref ) and
irdref are set to zero, the rotor current and the machine torque remain zero
(Figs. 10.19(c) and (d)). Substituting for Qs = 0 and solving for ird based on
(10.116), we deduce that the stator reactive power can be compensated if ird is
regulated at 144 A. Thus, at t = 0.2 s, irdref is changed from zero to 144 A and
the rotor current increases as Figure 10.19(c) shows. This results in elimination
of the magnetizing current component from the stator circuit and, therefore, the
stator current becomes zero, as Figure 10.19(a) illustrates. However, λs remains
regulated as Figure 10.19(b) illustrates. At t = 0.25 s, the mechanical torque is
removed, and the rotor speed remains constant at ωr = 470 rad/s (Fig. 10.19(e)).
    At t = 0.3 s, Teref is switched from zero to a dynamic value determined
by Teref = Peref /ωr where Peref = −1340 kW; since the torque control is
fast, that is, Te ≈ Teref , this, essentially, corresponds to a constant-power op-
eration. Thus, the stator and rotor currents increase (Figs. 10.19(a) and (c)),
the machine generates a negative torque (Fig. 10.19(d)), and ωr decreases
(Fig. 10.19(e)). Furthermore, as Figure 10.19(a) shows, the stator current is
−180◦ phase shifted with respect to the corresponding stator phase voltage
since Qs is nulliﬁed. Based on Teref = Peref /ωr , the absolute value of Te in-
creases with time (Fig. 10.19(d)), as ωr decreases. Thus, the stator and rotor
currents increase, as Figures 10.19(a) and (c) show.
    Figure 10.19(c) shows that in addition to the amplitude, the frequency of
the rotor current changes with ωr , such that at t = 0.5 s, that is, when ω0 ≈
ωr , the rotor current freezes and its phase sequence reverses thereafter. To
better demonstrate this phenomenon, Figure 10.20 illustrates ω = ω0 − ωr ,
sin ρ and cos ρ, the modulating signal maug-abc , and the rotor current irabc . As
discussed earlier in this chapter and also illustrated by Figure 10.2, the VSC
PWM generator and the rotor terminal voltage are synchronized to the angle ρ
and, therefore, they change with the frequency ω = dρ/dt. Based on (10.77),
this frequency is equal to the difference between the rotor angular speed and
the AC system frequency. Hence, at the standstill when ωr = 0, ω is equal to
ω0 whereas it is zero at the synchronous speed, that is, when ωr = ω0 . It is
also noted that the phase sequences of the rotor voltage/current are reversed
when ωr surpasses ω0 , that is, when ω becomes negative (Example 4.3 and
Fig. 4.12).
    Figure 10.21 provides a closer look at the rotor q-axis current component
and the machine torque. Figure 10.21(b) illustrates that −Te follows the same
pattern of variation as irq (Fig. 10.21(a)), as predicted by (10.51).
    Figure 10.22 illustrates waveforms of the machine electrical power, Pe , the
VSC DC-side power, PDC , and the stator (AC system) real and reactive power,
306                           VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


                       100
ω (rad/s)



                              0
                                  (a)
              −100
             cosρ and sinρ




                              1

                              0
                                  (b)
                             −1

                     1
                   0.5
   maug-abc




                     0
                  −0.5
                       (c)
                   −1

               800
               400
 irabc (A)




                 0
              −400
                    (d)
              −800
                 0.3                    0.35    0.4      0.45         0.5      0.55    0.6            0.65
                                                             time (s)

FIGURE 10.20 Response of the VSC system around the synchronous speed; Example 10.2.


       Ps and Qs . As Figure 10.22 shows, until t = 0.2 s, Pe , PDC , and Ps are zero,
       whereas Qs = 400 kVAr due to the machine magnetizing current supplied by
       the AC system. After t = 0.2 s, Qs reduces to zero (Fig. 10.22(d)), since irdref
       is changed from zero to 144 A, as described in Figure 10.19. From t = 0.3 s


                     600
                                  (a)
                     400
     irq (A)




                     200                                                                     irqref
                             0                                                               irq

              4500
                                  (b)
 −Te (N m)




              3000
              1500
                             0
                             0.25         0.3     0.35          0.4         0.45      0.5             0.55
                                                             time (s)

FIGURE 10.21 Responses of the rotor q-axis current component and the machine torque;
Example 10.2.
                                  CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM          307


                 0
 Pe (kW)



             −650
                      (a)
             −1300

              300
 PDC (kW)




              150
                0
             −150 (b)
             −300

                 0
 Ps (kW)




             −1000
                      (c)
             −1800
 Qs (kVAr)




               400

               200
                      (d)
                 0
                  0         0.1      0.2         0.3        0.4         0.5        0.6
                                              time (s)

FIGURE 10.22 Waveforms of various power components in the variable-frequency VSC
system of Figure 10.2; Example 10.2.



       on, Pe is regulated at about −1300 kW as Figure 10.22(a) shows. Thus, the
       kinetic energy of the machine is absorbed and delivered to the AC system.
       Figure 10.22(b) illustrates that the VSC DC-side power varies between −200
       and 320 kW, that is, within less than ±25% of Pe . Depending on whether ωr
       is larger or smaller than ω0 , PDC can assume different polarities, according
       to (10.114). Figure 10.22(c) illustrates that most of the machine power is di-
       rectly exchanged between the stator and the AC system, and Pe = Ps + PDC
       holds.



10.3.3           Permanent-Magnet Synchronous Machine
The variable-frequency VSC system of Figure 10.1 can also be used to control a
PMSM. In the abc and αβ frames, the PMSM model is time varying. As demonstrated
in Example 4.10, the model becomes time invariant if it is expressed in a dq-frame
that is synchronized to the rotor angle. Hence, for the VSC system of Figure 10.1 that
controls a PMSM, the angle ρ is equal to the rotor angle, θr . The rotor angle may be
either measured using a shaft encoder or observed based on an estimation technique
[50–52].
308         VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM


10.3.3.1 PMSM Model in Rotor-Field Coordinates Let us adopt the model of a
salient-pole PMSM, derived in Example 4.10 and represented by equations5
                            %         &       %           &%         &       %        &
                                λsd               Ld 0         isd               λm
                                          =                              +                ,                          (10.117)
                                λsq               0 Lq         isq               0


      %         &       %                 &%         &    %                  &%            &       %         &
d         λsd                0 ωr              λsd         −Rs 0                     isd               Vsd
                    =                                    +                                     +                 ,   (10.118)
dt        λsq               −ωr 0              λsq          0 −Rs                    isq               Vsq

and

                                          30        1         3
                                Te =         Ld − Lq isd isq + λm isq ,                                              (10.119)
                                          2                   2

where λsdq represents the stator ﬂux components, isdq denotes the stator current com-
ponents, Vsdq represents the stator voltage components, and ωr signiﬁes the rotor
speed. Ld and Lq are the d- and q-axis stator inductances that depend on the machine
geometry and rotor saliency; in a round (nonsalient) rotor machine Ld = Lq . The pa-
rameter λm represents the maximum amount of ﬂux generated by the rotor magnets
and linked by the stator windings.

10.3.3.2 PMSM Control in Rotor-Field Coordinates Equation (10.119) indicates
that the machine torque is composed of two components. One component is linearly
proportional to only isq , whereas the other component is proportional to the product
of isd and isq . The proportionality constant of the latter torque component, Ld − Lq ,
represents the rotor saliency; Ld − Lq becomes larger as the rotor becomes more
salient. In a current-control scheme where isd and isq can be independently controlled,
Te can be controlled based on different combinations of trajectories for isd and isq .
The desired combination is usually selected based on a performance criterion, for
example, the machine efﬁciency, torque per current ratio, etc., [90, 92–94]. However,
if the rotor saliency is not signiﬁcant, Ld − Lq is small and thus the torque component
proportional to isd isq does not have a considerable contribution to Te . Therefore, in
this case isd can be regulated at zero to minimize the line current and ohmic losses.
    To control isd and isq , (10.117) and (10.118) are transformed to the standard state-
space form by eliminating λsd and λsq between the two equations. The result is

                                    disd
                                 Ld      = −Rs isd + Lq ωr isq + Vsd ,                                               (10.120)
                                     dt
                                    disq
                                 Lq      = −Rs isq − Ld ωr isd − λm ωr + Vsq .                                       (10.121)
                                     dt

5 Equations of a simpliﬁed, nonsalient-rotor PMSM are derived in Section A.5.
                               CONTROL OF VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM                   309

Introducing the two new control variables

                             ud = Lq ωr isq + Vsd ,                                 (10.122)
                             uq = −Ld ωr isd − λm ωr + Vsq ,                        (10.123)

one can simplify (10.120) and (10.121) as

                                     disd
                                  Ld      + Rs isd = ud ,                           (10.124)
                                      dt
                                     disq
                                  Lq      + Rs isq = uq .                           (10.125)
                                      dt

Equations (10.124) and (10.125) represent two decoupled, ﬁrst-order, single-input-
single-output (SISO) subsystems. Therefore, two independent feedback loops can be
employed to regulate isd and isq at their respective reference commands of isdref and
isqref , as shown in Figure 10.23.
    Figure 10.23 shows that to control isd , the d-axis compensator kd (s) processes
the error ed = isdref − isd and commands ud . Similarly, the q-axis compensator kq (s)
processes the error eq = isqref − isq and delivers uq . Assuming that the closed-loop
transfer functions Isd (s)/Isdref (s) and Isq (s)/Isqref (s) are of the ﬁrst order with a time
constant of τi , we have

                                              Ld s + Rs
                                   kd (s) =             ,                           (10.126)
                                                  τi s
                                              Lq s + Rs
                                   kq (s) =             .                           (10.127)
                                                  τi s




FIGURE 10.23 Closed-loop d- and q-axis current controllers for PMSM, based on (10.124)
and (10.125).
310     VARIABLE-FREQUENCY VSC SYSTEM




      FIGURE 10.24 Implementation of d- and q-axis current controllers for PMSM.


To implement the control, Vsd and Vsq must be determined, respectively, from ud and
uq , based on (10.122) and (10.123). The result is

                           Vsd = ud − Lq ωr isq ,                           (10.128)
                            Vsq = uq + Ld ωr isd + λm ωr .                  (10.129)

Vsd and Vsq , calculated based on (10.128) and (10.129), are then divided by VDC /2
to yield md and mq . The process is illustrated in the block diagram of Figure 10.24.
PART II
Applications
11 Static Compensator (STATCOM)
11.1    INTRODUCTION

In this chapter, we analyze the static compensator (STATCOM).1 The STATCOM is
a VSC system whose prime function is to exchange reactive power with the host
AC system. In an electric power transmission system, the STATCOM can be used
to increase the line power transmission capacity [1], to enhance the voltage/angle
stability [95], or to damp the system oscillatory modes [96]. In a distribution system,
the STATCOM is mainly used for voltage regulation [97]; however, it can also supply
real power to the loads in the case of a blackout if it is augmented with an energy
storage device, for example, a battery storage system. Moreover, the STATCOM
may also be employed to balance a distribution network by compensating for load
imbalances.
    In this chapter, we demonstrate that the STATCOM is a special case of the
controlled DC-voltage power port that was introduced in Section 8.6 (Section 7.5
for αβ-frame control). Although this model enables one to analyze different appli-
cations of the STATCOM, in this chapter we merely focus on the application of
the STATCOM for AC voltage regulation. Even though the STATCOM can also be
controlled in αβ-frame, in this chapter we focus on the dq-frame control due to its
widespread acceptance in the technical literature. Furthermore, based on a dq-frame
platform we are able to formulate and analyze dynamics of the phase-locked loop
(PLL). The presented methodology is applicable to most cases where a VSC system
is interfaced with a weak AC system.


11.2    CONTROLLED DC-VOLTAGE POWER PORT

The kernel of the STATCOM is a controlled DC-voltage power port. As we discussed
in Section 8.6 (Section 7.5 for αβ-frame control), a controlled DC-voltage power port
is a VSC system whose DC bus is connected in parallel with an exogenous apparatus
(Figs. 8.21 and 7.21). The exogenous apparatus/system, which we refer to as
a power source, exchanges power with the DC side of the VSC; the VSC
DC-bus voltage is regulated via a closed-loop mechanism and, thus, the power

1 In the technical literature, the STATCOM is also referred to as static condenser (STATCON).


Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,    by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                313
314          STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


imposed by the power source is transferred to an AC system. The controlled DC-
voltage power port can also exchange a prespeciﬁed reactive power with the AC sys-
tem. In most VSC systems, a controlled DC-voltage power port is employed primarily
for real-power exchange. In the STATCOM, however, reactive-power exchange is the
main control objective.


11.3      STATCOM STRUCTURE

Figure 11.1 illustrates the schematic diagram of a STATCOM interfaced with an AC
system. The AC system is represented by an ideal three-phase voltage source, Vgabc ,
connected in series with a transmission line. The combined inductance of the line and
any interface transformer (not shown in the ﬁgure) is represented by Lg . For a less
cluttered formulation, the resistances of the line and transformer are assumed to be
negligible in this chapter. A comparison between Figures 11.1 and 8.21 reveals that
the STATCOM is a special case of the controlled DC-voltage power port (Section 8.6),
where the exogenous power source is eliminated, that is, iext = 0. The STATCOM
DC-bus voltage, VDC , is regulated by controlling the real power exchanged with
the rest of the system, that is, Ps , as detailed in Section 8.6. In the steady state, Ps
is small as it only compensates for the VSC power loss, associated with iloss . The
STATCOM of Figure 11.1 is different from the controlled DC-voltage power port of
Figure 8.21 since (i) the AC system has a considerable internal inductance, Lg , and


                                          STATCOM                                                       PCC
  iext = 0              iDC                                                                        Ps ≈ 0
               +                                                                                      Qs                                   AC system
                                                        Vta          ia R+ron L                              Vsa                     iga   Lg Vga
                                                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                                                                                    −




                                  Averaged  Vtb                      ib R+ron L                                  Vsb                 igb   Lg Vgb
  iloss      VDC                    ideal                                                                                                           +
                                                                                                                                                    −




                        C
                                three-phase V
                                              tc                     ic R+ron L                                    Vsc               igc   Lg Vgc
                                    VSC                                                                                                             +
                                                                                                                                                    −




               −                                                                                            Lf
                                                                                                            Rf
                   maug−abc                                                                                 Cf
                                 Saturation at ±1
                                                   ρ         dq
                                                                    abc
                                                                            Vsd
                                                                                         PLL           Harmonic filter

                    ρ       Third-harmonic injected PWM
                             signal generator (Fig. 8.17)                   Vsq                                        iLa iLb iLc
             VDC                  md mq                     id iq           idref              ρ
                                                                            iqref
                                                                                       Reference        Qsref              Load
                         Compensators in dq-frame                                       signal
                                                                                       generator


                                                            Pext = 0
                                            Compensator                   Saturation
   VDC . 2     −     eV                                                                   Psref
       ()                     −1              KV (s)

VDCref (.)2                 DC-bus voltage controller with feed-forward


                            FIGURE 11.1 Schematic diagram of the STATCOM.
                                 DYNAMIC MODEL FOR PCC VOLTAGE CONTROL                315

(ii) the reactive-power reference Qsref , which is commonly set to zero in the controlled
DC-voltage power port, is controlled via a closed-loop mechanism, as explained later
in this chapter.
    With reference to Figure 11.1, the electrical nodes where the STATCOM three
phases are connected to the corresponding phases of the AC system constitute the
point of common coupling (PCC). The PCC voltage is labeled as Vsabc . Figure 11.1
shows that the VSC synchronization signals, that is, the PLL inputs, are obtained
from the PCC. A three-phase load is also supplied from the PCC. Since the VSC
AC-side terminal voltages Vtabc are modulated waveforms and Lg is relatively large,
Vsabc includes large voltage notches that distort both the load voltage and the feedback
signals Vsd and Vsq . Therefore, a three-phase series RLC ﬁlter is connected in parallel
with the STATCOM at the PCC (Fig. 11.1). Each RLC branch is usually tuned to the
dominant pulse-width modulation (PWM) side-band harmonic, but exhibits a large
impedance at the grid frequency. Thus, the VSC current harmonics ﬂow through the
RLC ﬁlter and do not penetrate the grid.
    Due to the grid inductance, the magnitude and the phase angle of Vsabc can be
different from those of Vgabc , depending on load conditions. Moreover, load switching
incidents result in abrupt and large deviations in Vsabc . In this chapter, we demonstrate
that Vsabc can be regulated via a closed-loop system that adjusts the reactive-power
component Qs of the STATCOM.


11.4     DYNAMIC MODEL FOR PCC VOLTAGE CONTROL

11.4.1    Large-Signal Model of PCC Voltage Dynamics
The function of the STATCOM of Figure 11.1 is to regulate the PCC voltage, Vsabc ,
in the presence of iLabc , by controlling iabc . These variables are related by

                                      diga
                             Vsa = Lg      + Vga + Vnull ,                         (11.1)
                                       dt
                                      digb
                             Vsb = Lg      + Vgb + Vnull ,                         (11.2)
                                       dt
                                      digc
                             Vsc = Lg      + Vgc + Vnull ,                         (11.3)
                                       dt

and

                                     iga = ia − iLa ,                              (11.4)
                                     igb = ib − iLb ,                              (11.5)
                                     igc = ic − iLc ,                              (11.6)

where Vnull is the voltage of the AC system neutral point with respect to the
VSC (virtual or actual) DC-bus midpoint. Multiplying both sides of (11.1)–(11.3),
316     STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


respectively, by (2/3)ej0 , (2/3)ej2π/3 , and (2/3)ej4π/3 , and adding the corresponding
sides, based on (4.2), we obtain

                                           →
                                           −
                                  →
                                  −       d ig   →
                                                 −
                                  Vs = Lg      + Vg .                             (11.7)
                                           dt

Since ej0 + ej2π/3 + ej4π/3 ≡ 0, Vnull does not appear in the space-phasor expression
(11.7). Similarly, (11.4)–(11.6) can be combined and expressed as

                                     → −
                                     −   → −  →
                                     ig = i − i L .                               (11.8)

Let the AC system Thevnin voltage be

                                 g cos (ω0 t + θ0 ),
                           Vga = V
                                                        
                                                     2π
                           Vgb = Vg cos ω0 t + θ0 −       ,
                                                       3
                                                        
                                 g cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π ,
                           Vgc = V                                                (11.9)
                                                       3

where Vg is the amplitude of the line-to-neutral voltage, ω0 is the AC system frequency,
and θ0 is the initial phase angle of Vgabc . Then based on (4.2), Vgabc is equivalent to

                         →  j(ω0 t+θ0 )
                         −
                         Vg = Vg e       .                                       (11.10)

Figure 11.1 illustrates that the STATCOM is controlled in a dq-frame, synchro-
                                                   →
                                                   −               →
                                                                   −
nized to angle ρ. Thus, substituting in (11.7) for Vs = Vsdq ejρ , ig = igdq ejρ , and
→  j(ω0 t+θ0 )
−
Vg = Vg e         , we have

                                       d                g ej(ω0 t+θ0 ) .
                       Vsdq ejρ = Lg      (igdq ejρ ) + V                        (11.11)
                                       dt
                                                      →
                                                      −              →
                                                                     −
Similarly, it follows from substituting in (11.8) for ig = igdq ejρ , i = idq ejρ , and
→
−
iL = iLdq ejρ that

                                   igdq = idq − iLdq ,                           (11.12)

which can be decomposed into

                                    igd = id − iLd ,                             (11.13)
                                    igq = iq − iLq .                             (11.14)
                                  DYNAMIC MODEL FOR PCC VOLTAGE CONTROL               317

Calculating the derivative in (11.11), multiplying both sides by ejρ , and decomposing
the resultant into real and imaginary components, we obtain



                           digd             g cos(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ),
                  Vsd = Lg      − Lg ωigq + V                                     (11.15)
                            dt
                           digq             g sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ),
                  Vsq = Lg      + Lg ωigd + V                                     (11.16)
                            dt


where ω = dρ/dt. As detailed in Section 8.3.4, ω is controlled by the PLL (Fig. 8.5),
based on the control law


                        dρ
                           = ω(t) = H(p)Vsq (t),                                  (11.17)
                        dt


where p = d( · )/dt is the differentiation operator and H(s) is the transfer func-
tion of the PLL compensator. Thus, H(p)f (t) (f (t) is an arbitrary function of time)
represents the zero-state response of H(s) to the input f (t). As explained in Sec-
tion 8.3.4, the PLL compensator includes one integral term and thus ω(t) assumes
a nonzero steady-state value when Vsq settles at zero. Equations (11.13)–(11.17)
represent a dynamic system for which Vsd is the output, id and iq are the control
inputs, and iLd and iLq are the disturbance inputs. The system is nonlinear due to
the presence of the terms Vg cos(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ) and V g sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ). Moreover,
the frequency of the VSC system, ω, is a dynamic variable that depends on the op-
erating point. To further clarify this point, let us substitute for Vsq , from (11.16), in
(11.17):


                                              
             dρ                  digq               g H(p) sin(ω0 t + θ0 − ρ).
                = Lg H(p)             + ωigd       +V                             (11.18)
             dt                   dt



Equation (11.18) indicates that dynamic responses of ρ and ω, in addition to their
natural transient components corresponding to igd = igq = 0, include forced compo-
nents that are functions of igd and igq . This is in contrast to the case of a stiff grid
described by (8.24). Based on (8.24), if the VSC is interfaced with a stiff AC sys-
tem, the responses of ρ and ω merely include natural transient components; the PLL
dynamics are decoupled from those of the rest of the system and the operating point
and, therefore, once the PLL reaches the steady state, ρ = ω0 t + θ0 and ω = ω0 .
318      STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


11.4.2   Small-Signal Model of PCC Voltage Dynamics
Small-signal dynamics of the PCC voltage are derived by linearizing (11.15)–(11.17)
around a steady-state operating point. Let us deﬁne the following perturbed variables:

               Vsd = Vsd0 + Vsd ,
               Vsq = 0 + Vsq ,
               igd = igd0 + igd ,
               igq = igq0 + igq ,
               ω0 t + θ0 − ρ = −(ρ0 + ρ) =⇒ dρ/dt = ω0 + d ρ/dt .             (11.19)
                                                         
                                                    ω                  ω


We also note that if ρ̃/ρ0  1, then

                           cos(ρ0 + ρ) ≈ cos ρ0 − (sin ρ0 )ρ,
                           sin(ρ0 + ρ) ≈ sin ρ0 + (cos ρ0 )ρ.                 (11.20)

It then follows from (11.20) and substitution of the perturbed variables of (11.19) in
(11.15) and (11.16) that

                                                g cos ρ0 ,
                           Vsd0 = −Lg ω0 igq0 + V                             (11.21)
                                               g sin ρ0 ,
                              0 = Lg ω0 igd0 − V                              (11.22)

and

                           d igd                            g sin ρ0 )ρ,
                Vsd = Lg         − Lg ω0 igq − Lg igq0 ω − (V                 (11.23)
                            dt
                           d igq                            g cos ρ0 )ρ.
                Vsq = Lg         + Lg ω0 igd + Lg igd0 ω − (V                 (11.24)
                            dt

                               g sin ρ0 in (11.23) and (11.24), respectively, from
                 g cos ρ0 and V
Substituting for V
(11.21) and (11.22), we deduce

                      d igd                       dρ
           Vsd = Lg         − Lg ω0 igq − Lg igq0    − Lg ω0 igd0 ρ,          (11.25)
                       dt                         dt
                      d igq                       dρ 0                  1
           Vsq = Lg         + Lg ω0 igd + Lg igd0    − Vsd0 + Lg ω0 igq0 ρ. (11.26)
                       dt                         dt
                                 DYNAMIC MODEL FOR PCC VOLTAGE CONTROL               319

Similarly, substituting for the perturbed variables of (11.19) in (11.17), we deduce

                           dρ
                              = ω̃ = H(p)Vsq .                                   (11.27)
                           dt

Equations (11.25)–(11.27) can be expressed in the Laplace domain as
                                                       0                1
           Vsd (s) = Lg sI gd (s) − Lg ω0 I gq (s) − Lg igq0 s + ω0 igd0 ρ(s),   (11.28)
           Vsq (s) = Lg sI gq (s) + Lg ω0 I gd (s)
                       -             0              1.
                     + Lg igd0 s − Vsd0 + Lg ω0 igq0 ρ(s),                       (11.29)
                      H(s)
             ρ(s) =        Vsq (s).                                              (11.30)
                       s

Equations (11.25)–(11.27), or their Laplace domain counterparts (11.28)–(11.30),
describe a linear system that is the small-signal equivalent of the system described
by (11.15)–(11.17). To express the dynamics of Vsd (s) in terms of I gd (s) and I gq (s),
ﬁrst Vsq can be eliminated between (11.29) and (11.30), and then from the resultant
equation ρ can be substituted in (11.28). The result is

                          Vsd (s) = Gd (s)I gd (s) + Gq (s)I gq (s),             (11.31)

where Gd (s) and Gq (s) are two linear transfer functions whose parameters are func-
tions of igd0 and igq0 . In the system of Figure 11.1, id ≈ 0 and therefore id0 = id ≈ 0,
since the STATCOM exchanges a small amount of real power with the PCC, that is,
Ps ≈ 0, corresponding to the DC-side power of Ploss = VDC iloss (Fig. 11.1). Thus,
based on (11.13) and (11.14) we have

                                      igd0 ≈ −iLd0 ,                             (11.32)
                                      igq0 = iq0 − iLq0 ,                        (11.33)

and

                                       igd ≈ −iLd ,                              (11.34)
                                       igq = iq − iLq .                          (11.35)

Substituting for igd and igq , from (11.34) and (11.35), in (11.31), we conclude

               Vsd (s) = −Gd (s)I Ld (s) − Gq (s)I Lq (s) + Gq (s)I q (s) .      (11.36)
                                                              
                                  load effect              control effect
320       STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


                                                              iLq                  iLd

                                                                 AC system
                                                  Current      Equation (11.36)
                                                                                  Gd (s)
               Compensator                       controller
             eq            Qsqref         2 iqref       iq      –                    –
 Vsdref          kVac(s)             −            Gi(s)              Gq(s)                    Vsd
                                         3Vsd0
             –


      FIGURE 11.2 Control block diagram of the STATCOM PCC voltage regulator.


Equation (11.36) describes a dynamic system with Vsd as the output and iq as the
control input. The inputs iLd and iLq are, in general, functions of Vsd and Vsq (see
Examples 9.1 and 9.2) and therefore cannot be called disturbances. They also embed
dynamics of the harmonic ﬁlters. If iLabc can be measured, or a model is identiﬁed for
the load, the impact of iLd and iLq on Vsd can be mitigated by means of appropriate
feed-forward compensation techniques. However, these conditions are seldom satis-
ﬁed in practice. Therefore, load dynamics are commonly ignored and the stability of
the control system is delegated to a robust design of the compensator(s).
   Figure 11.2 shows a control block diagram of the STATCOM PCC voltage regu-
lator and illustrates that a compensator, kVac (s), processes Vsdref − Vsd and provides
Qsref . Assuming Vsd ≈ Vsd0 , based on (8.44), Qsref is divided by −2/(3Vsd0 ) to
provide iqref . Then, iq tracks iqref , based on a closed-loop transfer function, Gi (s).
As discussed in Section 8.4.1, parameters of the dq-frame current controllers can be
selected such that Gi (s) is a ﬁrst-order transfer function with an arbitrarily small time
constant. For most nested control structures, the closed-loop bandwidth of the voltage
control loop should be adequately lower than that of Gi (s), such that Gi (s) can be
approximated by a unity gain.


11.4.3    Steady-State Operating Point
The steady-state operating point of the STATCOM of Figure 11.1 can be derived by
eliminating cos ρ0 and sin ρ0 between (11.21) and (11.22), and solving for igq0 in
view of (11.32). The process yields
                                              /      0          1
                                    −Vsd0 +    Vg2 − Lg ω0 iLd0 2
                        igq0 =                                                             (11.37)
                                                 Lg ω0

or
                                              /      0          1
                                 −Vsd0 −       Vg2 − Lg ω0 iLd0 2
                        igq0 =                                       .                     (11.38)
                                                 Lg ω0

Based on (11.37) and (11.38), for a given iLd0 there are two possible values for igq0 that
result in the same Vsd0 . The two possibilities are illustrated in the phasor diagrams
                                   APPROXIMATE MODEL OF PCC VOLTAGE DYNAMICS                  321

                q                                                 q



                     jXg ig                                                                jXg ig
                         igd        Vs
                                         d                                            d
              igq             ig
                                                                                 Vs
                                   Vg           Vg




                                                                            ig
                                                            igq
                                                                      igd
               (a)                                            (b)
                                                                                  g
FIGURE 11.3 Phasor diagram of the two operating scenarios corresponding to Vsd0 = V
and a given iLd0 .

of Figures 11.3(a) and (b), which correspond to (11.37) and (11.38), respectively.
Figures 11.3(a) and (b) show that iLd0 and Vsd0 are the same in both operating scenar-
ios, indicating that the same amount of real power is exchanged between the load and
the AC system in both cases. However, in case of Figure 11.3(b), igq0 is considerably
larger than that of Figure 11.3(a). This, based on (11.33), implies that the STATCOM
has to provide a much larger reactive power in case of Figure 11.3(b), which would
be signiﬁcantly larger than its MVA rating. In contrast, (11.37) and Figure 11.3(a)
represent a realistic operating scenario, and
                                              /       0          1
                                    −Vsd0 + V   g2 − Lg ω0 iLd0 2
                      iq0 = iLq0 +                                  .           (11.39)
                                                 Lg ω0

                                                 g  |Lg ω0 iLd0 | then, based on (11.39),
                              g . Therefore, if V
Usually, Vsd0 is regulated at V
iq0 ≈ iLq0 .


11.5   APPROXIMATE MODEL OF PCC VOLTAGE DYNAMICS

If transient excursions of ρ and ω are ignored in (11.25), that is, ρ = d ρ/dt = 0, then
a simpliﬁed dynamic model can be derived as

                                               d igd
                                    Vsd ≈ Lg         − Lg ω0 igq .                        (11.40)
                                                dt

Since ρ and ω = d ρ/dt are functions of igd and igq , (11.40) provides an adequately
accurate description of the PCC voltage dynamics provided that igd and igq change
322       STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


                                                                          iLq                 iLd

                                                                             AC system
                                                                           Equation (11.42)
                                                                                              Lgs
                                                         Current
               Compensator                              controller
             eq            Qsqref               iqref                iq    –                   –
                                          2
 Vsdref          kVac(s)            −                    Gi(s)                  – Lgω 0                Vsd
             –                          3Vsd0


FIGURE 11.4 Control block diagram of the PCC voltage regulator, based on the approximate
model of (11.42).



slowly. Formally, this requires that (i) the PCC voltage control loop is adequately
slower than the d- and q-axis closed-loop current controllers and (ii) iLd and iLq have
reasonably low rates of change. Substituting for igd and igq from (11.34) and (11.35)
in (11.40), we obtain

                                         d iLd
                        Vsd ≈ −Lg              + Lg ω0 iLq − Lg ω0 iq .                             (11.41)
                                          dt

Equation (11.41) can be expressed in the Laplace domain as

                  Vsd (s) ≈ −Lg sI Ld (s) + Lg ω0 I Lq (s) − Lg ω0 I q (s).                         (11.42)

Comparing (11.42) with (11.36) we conclude that based on the approximate model
Gd (s) and Gq (s) are

                                         Gd (s) ≈ Lg s,                                             (11.43)
                                         Gq (s) ≈ −Lg ω0 .                                          (11.44)

   If the simpliﬁed model of (11.42) is considered as a design basis for kVac (s), then
the control block diagram of Figure 11.2 can be altered to that of Figure 11.4. Thus,
an inspection of the control loop suggests that kVac (s) in its simplest form can be a
proportional-integral (PI) compensator.


11.6      STATCOM CONTROL

Comparing Figure 11.1 with Figure 8.21, one notes that the STATCOM and the
controlled DC-voltage power port are conceptually similar. The difference is that in
the STATCOM no power source is interfaced with the VSC DC-side terminals and the
DC bus is merely terminated to the DC-bus capacitor(s). Therefore, the STATCOM
can be regarded as a special case of the controlled DC-voltage power port. Thus,
the STATCOM DC-bus voltage is regulated by controlling Ps , based on the same
                                                                                     STATCOM CONTROL                     323


                                      dq-frame current controller
                                                                    Feed-forward filter         Vsd
                                                                         Gff (s)                      AC-side dynamics
                                  d-axis compensator
           3      idref   − e                       ud                   md    VSC
                                                                                          Vtd               1
 Psref                            d
                                        kd (s)                                  X                                        id
         3Vsd0                                                                                         L s+(R+ron)

                                                                                                 X          L
                          X               L              VDC          VDC
           ω0                 Decoupling feed-forward                                     ω
                          X               L               2             2
                                                                                                 X          L
                                  q-axis compensator
 Qsref      2     iqref         eq                  uq                   mq               Vtq     −         1
         −                               kq (s)                                 X                                        iq
          3Vsd0           −                                                                       − L s+(R+ron)
                                                                        Gff (s)
                                                                    Feed-forward filter         Vsq

FIGURE 11.5 Control block diagram of the STATCOM dq-frame current controller (see
Section 8.4.1 for details).




approach as the one adopted for the controlled DC-voltage power port (Section 8.6).
In contrast, however, in the STATCOM Qs , which is usually a free control variable in
the controlled DC-voltage power port, is controlled through a closed-loop mechanism
that regulates the PCC voltage. The PCC voltage regulation is based on the model
of Figure 11.2 or its simpliﬁed version (Fig. 11.4). Since Vsq = 0, the control of
Ps and Qs is equivalent to the control of id and iq , respectively (see equations
(4.83) and (4.84)).
   The structure of the VSC dq-frame current controller shown in Figure 8.10, is re-
peated here as Figure 11.5. There is, however, a minor difference between the control
systems of Figures 8.10 and 11.5: if the AC system is stiff, the PLL dynamics are
decoupled from those of the other system variables. Thus, once the PLL start-up tran-
sients are passed, the angular velocity of the dq-frame settles to the constant value
ω0 . This condition holds for the current controller of Figure 8.10, where ω = ω0
appears as a constant parameter in both the plant coupling terms and the controller
decoupling terms. However, in the case of the STATCOM, ω is a dynamic vari-
able in the plant model, as illustrated in Figure 11.5; this is due to the AC system
weakness and the PLL dynamics. Thus, to decouple the plant d- and q-axis dynam-
ics, theoretically, ω (that is, an output of the PLL) should be used in the controller
decoupling terms, rather than ω0 . However, accepting a suboptimal (but quite effec-
tive) decoupling, we use ω0 in the STATCOM current-control scheme, as shown in
Figure 11.5.
   With reference to Figure 11.5, compensators kd (s) and kq (s) are


                                                                    kp s + ki
                                        kd (s) = kq (s) =                     .                                      (11.45)
                                                                        s
324     STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


Selecting kp and ki as

                                      L
                               kp =      ,                                        (11.46)
                                      τi
                                      R + ron
                               ki =           ,                                   (11.47)
                                        τi

we obtain the following closed-loop transfer functions for d- and q-axis current con-
trollers:
                            Id (s)      Iq (s)         1
                Gi (s) =             =           =          ,                     (11.48)
                           Idref (s)   Iqref (s)   τi s + 1

where the design choice τi is the desired time constant of the closed-loop step response.


11.7   COMPENSATOR DESIGN FOR PCC VOLTAGE CONTROLLER

The compensator of the PCC voltage controller, that is, kVac (s), is designed based on
the block diagram of Figure 11.2. The plant transfer function Gq (s) can be derived
from linearization of the system nonlinear equations, as discussed in Section 11.4.
However, if the PLL dynamics are ignored, a simple, low-order model is deduced
for Gq (s) and, instead the block diagram of Figure 11.4 can be employed. Based on
Figure 11.4, the plant transfer function is a pure gain, and kVac (s) in its simplest
form is a PI compensator. The bandwidth of the closed-loop PCC voltage control
system is usually selected to be adequately smaller than that of the closed-loop current
controllers, that is, 1/τi . Parameters of kVac (s) are selected based on the phase margin
and bandwidth requirements, as elaborated in Example 11.1.


11.8   MODEL EVALUATION

As explained in Section 11.5, the compensator for the AC voltage control loop can
be designed based on a simpliﬁed model that ignores the dynamics of the PLL,
shunt harmonic ﬁlter(s), and load(s). Based on these simplifying assumptions, we
approximated the high-order plant model by a pure gain (Fig. 11.4). In this section,
we evaluate ﬁdelity of the simpliﬁed model and accuracy of the results.
    To conduct accurate examinations, in general, a detailed switched model of the
STATCOM can be developed in a digital time-domain simulation environment, based
on Figure 11.1. In our case, however, the response pattern may be difﬁcult to examine
in the presence of switching harmonics, especially if the variables change in a vicinity
of their respective steady-state values. Thus, we develop a simpliﬁed simulation model
of the STATCOM, shown in Figure 11.6, in which the VSC AC side is represented by
its averaged model, that is, by three, linear, dependent voltage sources. This model
avoids the switching harmonics that exist in the actual response. However, it does not
                                                                                         MODEL EVALUATION               325

                         dq-frame current controller
                                       Feed-forward filter
             Vsd                            Gff (s)                      VSC
                                                                                                         Lg V
Psref 2          idref
                                  d-axis compensator
                                                            Vtd                  Vta R+ron L isa Vsa         ga
                                 ed               ud




                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                  −
0                            −          kd (s)                               +   Vtb         isb Vsb        Vgb
     3V    sd0                                            − Vtq   dq         −




                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                  −
                                Decoupling feed-forward                        + V
                                                                                  tc         isc     Vsc    Vgc
                                                                               −




                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                  −
               id                          X                                      +
               ω            L                                      abc
                                                                                  −

               iq                          X
                                 q-axis compensator                     ρ                               Rf1            Rf2
Qsref     2 iqref            −eq                  uq
        −                               kq (s)                          ω               Vsa
        3Vsd 0                                                         Vsd        PLL   Vsb              Lf1           Lf2
                                    Feed-forward filter
             Vsq                                                       Vsq              Vsc
                                            Gff (s)                                                      Cf1           Cf2

        AC voltage compensator                                     abc
                                                                             ia                Harmonic filters and/or load
                                                                             ib
              kVac (s)                    Vsdref          id                 ic
                                   −
                                                          iq      dq
                                 Vsd

                 FIGURE 11.6 A simpliﬁed simulation model of the STATCOM.


alter the system dynamic characteristics since the switching harmonics are of high
frequencies and well beyond the bandwidth of controllers.
   The model of the VSC in Figure 11.6 is based on the following equations, as
outlined in Section 8.4.1 and Figure 11.5:

                                                                 VDC
                                                       Vtd (t) =     md (t),                                      (11.49)
                                                                  2
                                                                 VDC
                                                       Vtq (t) =     mq (t),                                      (11.50)
                                                                  2

and

                                                             2 0                  1
                                               md =                ud − Lωiq + Vsd ,                              (11.51)
                                                          VDC
                                                             2 0                  1
                                               mq =                uq + Lωid + Vsq .                              (11.52)
                                                          VDC

Comparing (11.49) with (11.51), and (11.50) with (11.52), we deduce
                                                       0               1
                                                  Vtd = ud − Lωiq + Vsd ,                                         (11.53)
                                                       0               1
                                                  Vtq = uq + Lωid + Vsq .                                         (11.54)

The control signals of the dependent sources are then generated from Vtd and
Vtq , based on a dq- to abc-frame transformation. In the steady state, Vtd and Vtq
become DC quantities and thus Vtabc is a pure sinusoidal waveform. In reality,
however, Vtabc is a modulated waveform of which only the per-switching-cycle
326      STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


average is a sinusoidal function of time. Note that, other than the VSC, the STAT-
COM of Figure 11.6 includes all other elements (i.e., PLL, ﬁlters, compensators,
feed-forward terms, etc.) of the actual STATCOM of Figure 11.1. The voltage at the
PCC is controlled via Qsref . However, the STATCOM exchanges a small amount of
real power, corresponding to the VSC losses, with the PCC. Thus, Psref is set to zero
in the STATCOM of Figure 11.6. In the STATCOM of Figure 11.1, Psref is a small
value to regulate the DC-bus voltage.
    Based on the model of Figure 11.6, dynamic performance of the STATCOM can be
evaluated under various test signals and load conditions, with the impact of switching
harmonics masked. The model of Figure 11.6 can also reveal potential instabilities
due to both the harmonic ﬁlters and the load dynamics. Moreover, the STATCOM
response can be compared with that of the simpliﬁed model of Figure 11.4 that is used
for the compensator design. The model of Figure 11.6 preserves the main dynamic
characteristics of the STATCOM and the AC system.
    In the following examples, we evaluate the developed model and design of the
STATCOM by comparing the models of Figures 11.4 and 11.6, and also by comparing
both foregoing models with the detailed switched model of the STATCOM that is
based on the system of Figure 11.1.

   EXAMPLE 11.1         Compensator Design for AC Voltage Controller
   Consider the STATCOM model of Figure 11.6 in which the objective is to
   regulate the PCC voltage at Vsd0 = Vg = 0.391 kV. The STATCOM includes
   two ﬁlters but no loads. The system parameters are

       r L = 200 ␮H, R = 2.38 m, and ron = 0.88 m, for the VSC,
       rVg = 0.391 kV, ω0 = 377 rad/s, and Lg = 50 ␮H, for the AC system, and
       r Rf 1 = 1.0 m, Lf 1 = 19 ␮H, Cf 1 = 508 ␮F, Rf 2 = 1.0 m, Lf 2 = 19
         ␮H, and Cf 2 = 450 ␮F for the ﬁlters.

   Transfer functions of current-control compensators and feed-forward ﬁlters are

                                             0.2s + 3.26
                         kd (s) = kq (s) =                 [],
                                                  s
                                         1
                         Gff (s) =              .
                                     0.002s + 1

   Transfer function of the PLL compensator (see Figure 8.5) is
                       0            10               1
               683,790 s2 + 568,516 s2 + 166s + 6889
      H(s) =  0                    1 0                  1          [(rad/s)/(kV)].
             s s2 + 1508s + 568,516 s2 + 964s + 232,324

   It should be noted that in the simulation model of Figure 11.6, iabc and Vsabc
   are sampled based on a gain of 1/1000; that is, the feedback, feed-forward, and
                                                                   MODEL EVALUATION             327

     control signals are expressed in kA and kV. Therefore, each dependent voltage
     source has a gain of 1000 to compensate for the attenuation ratio.
        Based on the given parameters, the closed-loop transfer functions of d-and
     q-axis current controllers are

                                                  1000
                                     Gi (s) =            .
                                                s + 1000

     Then, based on the block diagram of Figure 11.4, the compensator

                                                2000
                                  kVac (s) =               [kA]
                                                  s

     results in a gain crossover frequency of ωc = 64 rad/s and a phase margin of
     about 86◦ . We note that ωc is about 15 times smaller than the bandwidth of
     Gi (s), and therefore, the loop gain is effectively an integrator. Consequently,
     the closed-loop transfer function is predominantly of the ﬁrst order and its time
     constant is approximately equal to 1/ωc = 15 ms. Although this design may
     seem too conservative, it should be noted that the grid inductance is not precisely
     known, and is often subject to a large tolerance. Moreover, we have ignored
     the dynamics of the ﬁlters, loads, and PLL. Thus, by selecting such a large
     phase margin, we can ensure that the closed-loop system remains stable in the
     presence of unmodeled dynamics and parameter uncertainties. The resultant
     closed-loop system can regulate the PCC voltage in less than one cycle of the
     power frequency, as will be seen later.
        Initially, the STATCOM is under a steady-state condition and Vsd = Vsdref =
     391 V. At t = 0.4 s, Vsdref is subjected to a stepwise change from 391 to 450
     V. Figures 11.7(a) and (b) illustrate the response of Vsd to the disturbance.


           450 (a)
           435
 Vsd (V)




           420                                              reference
           405                                              model of Figure 11.4
           390                                              model of Figure 11.6 without filters



           450 (b)
           435
 Vsd (V)




           420                                                 reference
           405                                                 model of Figure 11.4
           390                                                 model of Figure 11.6 with filters

                 0.4    0.425       0.45          0.475           0.5       0.525        0.55
                                                time (s)
FIGURE 11.7 Step response of Vsd based on the model or Figure 11.6 (a) without harmonic
ﬁlters and (b) with harmonic ﬁlters; Example 11.1.
328               STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


                 600 (a)
                 400
    Vsabc (V)


                 200                                                                Vsa
                   0                                                                Vsb
                −200                                                                Vsc
                −400                                                                Vsd
                −600


             3000 (b)
             2000
 iabc (A)




             1000
                0                                                                    ia
            −1000                                                                    ib
            −2000                                                                    ic
            −3000
                     0.4         0.425       0.45           0.475        0.5          0.525
                                                 time (s)

FIGURE 11.8 Responses of the PCC voltage and the STATCOM AC-side current when the
harmonic ﬁlters are not in service; Example 11.1.


       Figure 11.7(a) (solid line) illustrates the response of Vsd obtained from the
       model of Figure 11.6, when the harmonic ﬁlters are disconnected. Figure 11.7(b)
       (solid line) illustrates the response when the harmonic ﬁlters are in service. For
       the sake of comparison, Figures 11.7(a) and (b) (dashed line) also depict the
       response obtained from the simpliﬁed control model of Figures 11.4. As Figures
       11.7(a) and (b) illustrate, Vsd tracks Vsdref based on a ﬁrst-order exponential
       function and reaches the steady state in about 75 ms. This conforms to our
       expectation that the time constant of the step response is about 15 ms. Moreover,
       it is observed that there is an insigniﬁcant difference between the STATCOM
       response corresponding to the case where the ﬁlters are disconnected and the
       case where the ﬁlters are in service. Figures 11.7(a) and (b) also show that the
       response based on the control model of Figure 11.4 (dashed line) closely agrees
       with that obtained from the simulation model of Figure 11.6 (solid line).
           Figure 11.8 illustrates the waveforms of the PCC voltage and the STATCOM
       AC-side current, corresponding to the case where the harmonic ﬁlters are not
       in service. As Figure 11.8(a) shows, Vsabc smoothly increases and reaches the
       steady state while its peak value resides on the waveform of Vsd . The reason is
       that, based on (4.77) and since Vsq ≈ 0, the amplitude of the PCC line-to-neutral
       voltage is equal to Vsd . Figure 11.8(b) illustrates that subsequent to the voltage
       reference change, the STATCOM line current increases from zero to about 3000
       A (peak value), corresponding to the reactive power that must be injected into
       the grid to increase the PCC voltage from 391 to 450 V (peak value).
           Figure 11.9 illustrates the responses of the PCC voltage and STATCOM AC-
       side current when the harmonic ﬁlters are in service. Figure 11.9(a) shows that
       the behavior of Vsabc is the same as that of the case without harmonic ﬁlters (Fig.
       11.8(a)). However, a comparison between Figures 11.9(b) and 11.8(b) reveals
       that when the harmonic ﬁlters are in the circuit, the STATCOM line current is
       nonzero before the step change in the PCC voltage command. The reason is that
                                                                       MODEL EVALUATION        329

                 600 (a)
                 400
    Vsabc (V)


                 200                                                                   Vsa
                   0                                                                   Vsb
                −200                                                                   Vsc
                −400                                                                   Vsd
                −600


             3000 (b)
             2000
 iabc (A)




             1000
                0                                                                         ia
            −1000                                                                         ib
            −2000                                                                         ic
            −3000
                           0.4        0.425          0.45          0.475         0.5       0.525
                                                        time (s)

FIGURE 11.9 Responses of the PCC voltage and the STATCOM AC-side current when the
harmonic ﬁlters are in service; Example 11.1.



       the harmonic ﬁlters are capacitive at the AC system frequency and thus supply
       the grid with a small amount of reactive power. Consequently, to maintain Vsd at
       391 V, the STATCOM absorbs the reactive power of the ﬁlters, at the expense of
       a small AC-side current. Note that Figures 11.7–11.9 provide clear illustrations
       of the system variables and waveforms, as the model of Figure 11.6 does not
       include the switching distortions.


       EXAMPLE 11.2                  STATCOM Performance Based on Switched Model
       Consider the STATCOM of Figure 11.1 that employs the three-level NPC of
       Figure 6.18. The converter parameters are 2C = 19250 ␮F, Vd = 1.0 V, and
       fs = 1680 Hz. The three-level NPC also adopts the third-harmonic injected
       pulse-width modulation (PWM) strategy. Two harmonic ﬁlters are paralleled
       with the STATCOM at the PCC. The ﬁlters are the same as those in Example
       11.1 and exhibit low impedances to the 27th- and 29th-order harmonics of the
       AC system frequency. The DC-bus voltage reference VDCref is set to 1750 V.
       The PCC voltage reference, Vsdref , is set to 391 V, corresponding to the line-to-
       line voltage of 480 Vrms. The controllers of the three-level NPC partial DC-side
       voltage balancer are

                                 K(s) = 0.7     [(kV)−1 ],
                                           s2 + (3ω0 )2       s2 + 11312
                                 F (s) =                =                    .
                                            (s + 3ω0 )2   s2 + 2262s + 11312

       (See Section 6.7.2 and Figure 6.17 or Section 8.5 and Figure 8.20 for details).
       All the other parameters and controllers are the same as those in Example 11.1.
       Figure 11.10 illustrates the system response to stepwise changes in Vsdref and
330   STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)




       FIGURE 11.10 Overall performance of the STATCOM of Example 11.2.



  sudden energization of a series RL load, based on a detailed switched model
  of the STATCOM of Figure 11.1.
     Initially, the STATCOM gating pulses are blocked, all the controllers are
  inactive, and the load is disconnected; however, the PLL is in service. Since
  the STATCOM is connected to the PCC, the DC-side capacitors are charged
  via the VSC antiparallel diodes, and VDC increases to about 750 V as Fig-
  ure 11.10(b) shows. During this uncontrolled charging phase, the STATCOM
  AC-side current assumes a fairly large amplitude, and therefore id and iq exhibit
  relatively large spikes (Figs. 11.10(a) and (c)). Moreover, the PLL attempts to
  lock to Vsabc , and therefore Vsd , Vsq , and ω undergo large excursions, as Fig-
  ures 11.10(d) and (e) illustrate. Figures 11.10(d) and (e) also show that the PLL
  reaches the steady state in 0.15 s, and Vsq and ω settle down at zero and 377
  rad/s, respectively.
     At t = 0.2 s, the STATCOM gating pulses are unblocked and the controllers
  are enabled. Thus, the DC-bus voltage controller decreases id to a negative
  value (Fig. 11.10(a)), to transfer real power from the AC system to the DC
  side. This action results in an increase of VDC , as Figure 11.10(b) illustrates.
  The abrupt ﬂow of real power to the VSC DC side, at t = 0.2 s, results in
  a transient voltage drop at the PCC (Fig. 11.10(d)). Consequently, the PCC
  voltage controller commands a negative iq to regulate Vsd , as Figure 11.10(c)
                                                         MODEL EVALUATION          331

illustrates. Figures 11.10(e) show that Vsq and ω undergo excursions at t = 0.2 s.
Figures 11.10(b) and (d) indicate that VDC and Vsd are rapidly regulated at their
respective reference values. Figure 11.10(c) illustrates that iq assumes a positive,
small, steady-state value. The reason is that the harmonic ﬁlters supply reactive
power to the PCC. Thus, to regulate Vsd , the STATCOM absorbs the reactive
power of the ﬁlters.
    At t = 0.4 s, Vsdref is changed stepwise from 391 to 450 V. Consequently,
the PCC voltage controller commands a negative iq (Fig. 11.10(c)), and Vsd in-
creases as a ﬁrst-order exponential function (Fig. 11.10(d)). The disturbance has
insigniﬁcant impacts on VDC , Vsq , and ω, as Figures 11.10(b) and (e) illustrate.
At t = 0.56 s, Vsdref is changed back to 391 V. Thus, iq and Vsd exponentially
approach the same respective steady-state values as they possessed from t =
0.2 to 0.4 s (Fig. 11.10(c) and (d)). Figures 11.10(b) and (e) illustrate that the
disturbance has insigniﬁcant impacts on VDC , Vsq , and ω.
    At t = 0.7 s, a three-phase series RL load is connected to the PCC. The load
conﬁguration is the same as that of Figure 9.4, but its inductance and resistance
are L1 = 137 ␮H and R1 = 83 m, respectively. Based on the given parameters,
and assuming a line-to-line voltage of 480 Vrms, the load real and reactive
power are calculated as 2.0 MW and 1.247 MVAr, respectively. Subsequent to
the load energization, Vsd drops (Fig. 11.10(d)) and Vsq and ω are disturbed
(Fig. 11.10(e)). Thus, the PCC voltage controller responds accordingly and iq
approaches a negative steady-state value corresponding to the load (and ﬁlters)
reactive power (Fig. 11.10(c)). The disturbance has an insigniﬁcant impact on
VDC , as Figure 11.10(b) illustrates.
    Figure 11.11 provides a closer look at the STATCOM response at about t =
0.4 s. Figure 11.11(a) illustrates that Vsd is distorted by the PWM switching
harmonics. However, its per-switching-cycle average changes based on a ﬁrst-
order exponential function that closely agrees with the response of Vsd shown in
Figures 11.7(a) and (b). Figures 11.11(b) shows that subsequent to the voltage
increase, iq assumes a large negative steady-state value to supply reactive power
to the AC system. Figure 11.11(c) illustrates that the amplitude of the STAT-
COM line current is equal to the absolute value of iq (t). This can be explained
based on (4.77) and the fact that id ≈ 0. Figure 11.11(c) also shows that the
PCC voltage and the STATCOM line current are 90◦ phase shifted. The reason
is that the STATCOM exchanges a negligible real power with the AC system.
Figure 11.11(d) illustrates the partial DC-side voltages of the three-level NPC
(see Fig. 6.18 for schematic of a three-level NPC converter). As Figure 11.11(d)
shows, the partial DC-side voltages, V1 and V2 , include triple power-frequency
ripples whose amplitudes grow as the STATCOM line current increases.
However, the DC components of V1 and V2 are kept equal by the VSC DC-side
voltage equalizing scheme (see Section 6.7.2 and Figure 6.17, or Section 8.5
and Figure 8.20 for details).
    Figure 11.12 shows the system performance when the load is energized,
that is, at t = 0.7 s. Figure 11.12(a) illustrates that following the energization,
the load real and reactive power increase from zero to, respectively, 2.0 MW
332                           STATIC COMPENSATOR (STATCOM)


                             480
                                   (a)
                             450
             Vsd (V)


                             420                                                                   Vsdref
                             390                                                                   Vsd
                             360


                      0
                                   (b)
 iq (A)




                  −1000
                  −2000
                  −3000


                   3000            (c)                                                           5Vsa (V)
  Vsa and ia




                   2000
                   1000                                                                          i a (A)
                      0
                  −1000
                  −2000
                  −3000

                             935
             V1 and V2 (V)




                                 (d)                                                                   V1
                             905
                                                                                                       V2
                             875
                             845
                             815
                                         0.4         0.425    0.45          0.475          0.5              0.525
                                                                 time (s)

          FIGURE 11.11 Response of the STATCOM to step change in Vsdref ; Example 11.2.

                 2000 (a)
 PL and QL




                 1500
                 1000                                                                            PL (kW)
                  500                                                                            QL (kVAr)
                    0

                 1500
                      (b)
 Qs (kVAr)




                 1000
                  500
                              0


                       391
 Vsd (V)




                                   (c)
                       325
                       250


                       390
 Vsabc (V)




                              0
                −390 (d)
                                               0.7     0.72   0.74       0.76       0.78         0.8
                                                                  time (s)
                   FIGURE 11.12 Response of the STATCOM to load energization; Example 11.2.
                                                       MODEL EVALUATION         333

and 1.247 MVAr. Therefore, the AC voltage controller responds and the STAT-
COM delivers reactive power to the AC system, as Figure 11.12(b) illustrates.
Figure 11.12(c) shows that the disturbance results in a 30% voltage drop in Vsd ;
however, Vsd reverts to its nominal value in less than one cycle of the AC system
frequency. Figure 11.12(d) shows that Vsabc remains tightly regulated in spite
of the disturbance. The high-frequency components on the waveforms of Vsa ,
Vsb , and Vsc are due to the dynamic interactions between the ﬁlter capacitors,
the combined effect of the AC system, ﬁlter, and STATCOM inductances.
12 Back-to-Back HVDC Conversion
               System


12.1    INTRODUCTION

This chapter deals with the control of the VSC-based back-to-back high-voltage
DC (HVDC) conversion system. Developments of this chapter are based on
the dq-frame models and controls for the real-/reactive-power controller and the
controlled DC-voltage power port, presented in Chapter 8. Although we concentrate
on the dq-frame control, the αβ-frame control approach of Chapter 7 is also applicable
to the HVDC system.


12.2    HVDC SYSTEM STRUCTURE

Figure 12.1 illustrates a schematic diagram of a VSC-based back-to-back HVDC
system [98]. The HVDC conversion system is composed of two back-to-back con-
nected VSC systems. Both VSC systems employ the three-level NPC as their power
converters, labeled as NPC1 and NPC2. Each three-level NPC has a DC-side capaci-
tive voltage divider with two nominally identical capacitors (Fig. 6.18). However, the
capacitors of one three-level NPC are not necessarily identical to those of the other
one. As discussed in Sections 6.7.2 and 8.5, the partial DC-side voltages of each
three-level NPC must be equalized by means of a corresponding DC-side voltage
equalizing scheme. Figure 12.1 also shows that NPC1 (NPC2) is interfaced with an
AC system, that is, Grid1 (Grid2), through an interface transformer, TR1 (TR2), at
the point of common coupling PCC1 (PCC2). As Figure 12.1 illustrates, each grid is
                                                  
represented by a three-phase voltage source, Vgabc1       
                                                       (Vgabc2 ), and an internal induc-
             
tance, Li1 (Li2 ). To mitigate switching voltage/current harmonics, a shunt, tuned ﬁlter
is connected to PCC1 (PCC2). Figure 12.1 also shows an optional AC voltage regu-
lator for PCC1 (PCC2). The AC voltage regulator utilizes the feedback signal Vsabc1
(Vsabc2 ) and issues the command Qsref 1 (Qsref 2 ). The analysis and design of the AC
voltage regulator is based on the methodology that was presented in Chapter 11 in
the context of the static compensator (STATCOM).



Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

334
              PCC1                                                                                                                       PCC2
                     Qs1                                                                                                               Qs2
                     Ps1                                                                                                               Ps2
                                                                          +
      V′ga1 L′                                                                                   Vta2 R+r                              TR2   L′i2 V′ga2
              i1    TR1 V sa1       ia1 L R+ronV ta1                                                        on L
                                                                                                                   ia2 V sa2




      −
                                                                                                                                                   −




                                                                                                                                                 +
        +
                                                              C11 V11 V12 C12
      V′gb1 L′i1           V sb1      ib1 L R+ronV tb1 Three-                 Three- Vtb2 R+r L ib2
                                                                                             on                          V sb2               L′i2 V′gb2




      −
                                                                                                                                                   −




                                                                                                                                                 +
        +                                               level        V
                                                                  01 DC 02     level
      V′gc1 L′i1                                       NPC1                   NPC2 Vtc2                                                      L′i2 V′gc2
                                V sc1 ic1 L R+ronV tc1                                    R+ron L ic2                          V sc2




      −
                                                                                                                                                   −




        +                                                     C21 V21 V22 C22                                                                    +


        Grid1                                                             −                                                                  Grid2


                                                                  Control and PWM


                   Harmonic filter1                      Psref1      Qsref1 Qsref 2     VDCref                       Harmonic filter2




                                                   PCC1 voltage                       PCC2 voltage
                                                     regulator                          regulator
                                                    (optional)                         (optional)

                                    FIGURE 12.1 Schematic diagram of the VSC-based back-to-back HVDC system.




335
336       BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


    It should be noted that in the HVDC system of Figure 12.1, the DC-side midpoints
of NPC1 and NPC2, that is, nodes 01 and 02 , are not linked. As discussed in Chapter
6, the midpoint current of the three-level NPC has a third-harmonic component that
distorts the partial DC-side voltages of the three-level NPC. Thus, if two midpoints are
connected, the midpoint current of one NPC also affects the partial DC-side voltages
of the other three-level NPC since the net DC-bus voltage is the same for both three-
level NPCs (Fig. 12.1). This results in the generation of interharmonics through the
pulse-width modulation (PWM) process, especially if Grid1 and Grid2 are at different
frequencies, for example, 50 and 60 Hz.
    The operational strategy of the back-to-back HVDC system of Figure 12.1 can be
itemized as follows:

      r The HVDC system enables bidirectional real-power exchange between Grid1
        and Grid2, based on the command Psref 1 .
      r Qsref 1 (Qsref 2 ) is set to a prespeciﬁed value and not changed during the opera-
        tion. Alternatively, it can be closed-loop controlled to regulate the corresponding
        AC voltage at PCC1 (PCC2).
      r The net DC-bus voltage must be regulated at a prespeciﬁed value, that is, VDCref ,
        while the partial DC-side voltages of each three-level NPC must be kept equal,
        that is, V11 = V21 and V12 = V22 .

   In our developments, we may review and discuss the HVDC system components
based on generic block diagrams. However, when we develop speciﬁc formulations
for one of the two VSC systems, we index the variables and parameters by either “1”
or “2”, corresponding to Grid1 or Grid2, respectively.




12.3     HVDC SYSTEM MODEL

12.3.1     Grid and Interface Transformer Models
Figure 12.2(a) provides a close-up of the interface transformer and the grid for one
side of the HVDC converter system of Figure 12.1. The transformer high-to-low (line-
to-line) voltage ratio is N. In the HVDC system of Figure 12.1, the synchronization
and feed-forward signals, that is, Vsabc , are obtained from the transformer low-voltage
side. Therefore, the transformer leakage inductance Ll , referred to the high-voltage
side, effectively is lumped with the grid inductance Li , and the effective grid
inductance is Lg = Ll + Li (Fig. 12.2(a)). The neutral point of the grid is connected
to the ground and serves as the potential reference node for the transformer
high-voltage side (Fig. 12.2(a)). However, the potential reference node for the
low-voltage side of the transformer is the midpoint of the corresponding three-level
NPC, that is, node 01 or 02 in Figure 12.1. Thus, the star point of the transformer
low-voltage side assumes a voltage Vnull with reference to the corresponding DC-side
midpoint.
                                                                  HVDC SYSTEM MODEL         337


                                   Transformer                                   Grid
                   Vxa                     Vya              Ll′    Vpa   Li′      V ′ga
   ia Vsa

                   Vxb                     Vyb              Ll′    Vpb   Li′      V ′gb
   ib Vsb
                           Vnull
                   Vxc                     Vyc              Ll′    Vpc   Li′      V ′gc
   ic Vsc
                   1                       N
                                                                   Lg′
                       Windings turns ratio
                                                 (a)
                                                       Lg         Vga
                                     ia Vsa

                                                       Lg         Vgb
              Interface to           ib Vsb
              VSC system                                                 Vnull
                                                       Lg         Vgc
                                     ic    Vsc


                                                 (b)
FIGURE 12.2 (a) Schematic diagram of the interface transformer and grid. (b) Equivalent
circuit where parameters and variables are referred to the low-voltage side of the interface
transformer.


   With reference to Figure 12.2(a), the following equations hold if the transformer
leakage inductance is ignored:

                                        1      1
                                   Vxa =  Vya ≈ Vpa ,                                     (12.1)
                                        N      N
                                        1      1
                                   Vxb = Vyb ≈ Vpb ,                                      (12.2)
                                        N      N
                                        1      1
                                   Vxc = Vyc ≈ Vpc .                                      (12.3)
                                        N      N

Vsabc is expressed as

                                     Vsa = Vxa + Vnull ,                                  (12.4)
                                     Vsb = Vxb + Vnull ,                                  (12.5)
                                     Vsc = Vxc + Vnull .                                  (12.6)
338      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


Figure 12.2(b) illustrates a circuit equivalent to that of Figure 12.2(a), where the grid
voltage and its equivalent inductance are referred to the transformer low-voltage side.
The equivalent circuit of Figure 12.2(b) is a more convenient representation for the
analysis of the HVDC system. Considering the transformer turns ratio and winding
conﬁguration, one concludes that the amplitude of Vgabc is 1/N times that of Vgabc      ,
                2       
and Lg = Lg /N = (Li + Ll )/N .     2




12.3.2   Back-to-Back Converter System Model
Figure 12.3(a) illustrates that the back-to-back HVDC converter system can be con-
sidered as the composition of two constant-frequency VSC systems: the left-hand-
side VSC system is a real-/reactive-power controller (Section 8.3, Fig. 8.3), and the
right-hand-side VSC system is a controlled DC-voltage power port (Section 8.6,
Fig. 8.21). As Figure 12.3(a) shows, the real-/reactive-power controller and the con-
trolled DC-voltage power port are interfaced with Grid1 and Grid2, respectively. The
real-/reactive-power controller and the controlled DC-voltage power port are con-
nected in parallel from their DC-side terminals.
   In the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(a), the real-/reactive-power controller can
independently control the real and reactive power exchanged with Grid1, that is, Ps1
and Qs1 . The DC-side voltage of a real-/reactive-power controller must be supported
by a DC voltage source. In the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(a), the right-hand side
VSC system, that is, the controlled DC-voltage power port, provides the DC voltage
support to the real-/reactive-power controller. In a steady state, Ps1 is approximately
equal to the negative of the DC power Pext = VDC iext , which is imposed on the con-
trolled DC-voltage power port. However, Qs1 is merely the result of energy exchange
among the three phases of VSC1 and does not correspond to any power exchange with
the converter DC side. The principles of operation and control of the real-/reactive-
power controller are detailed in Sections 8.3 and 8.4. In this chapter, we assume that
Qs1 is regulated at a prespeciﬁed value. However, as outlined in Chapter 11, Qs1 can
be independently controlled in a closed-loop system to regulate Vsabc1 , in case the
grid inductance Lg1 is signiﬁcant.
   In the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(a), the controlled DC-voltage power port,
that is, the right-hand-side VSC system, provides a regulated DC voltage to the real-/
reactive-power controller, that is, the left-hand-side VSC system. The DC-bus volt-
age, VDC , is regulated by the control of Ps2 , that is, the real power that is exchanged
with Grid2. Thus, Ps2 must be kept equal to Pext to maintain the power exchanged
with the DC-bus capacitor at zero, such that the DC-bus voltage remains constant.
The end result is that the negative of Ps1 , which is a free control variable in the real-/
reactive-power controller, is transferred to Grid2 through the controlled DC-voltage
power port. The principles of operation and control of the controlled DC-voltage
power port are presented in Section 8.6. Similar to the real-/reactive-power con-
troller, in the controlled DC-voltage power port Qs2 does not contribute to the ex-
change of energy with the VSC DC side; therefore, it is regulated at an arbitrary
value, for example, zero for unity power-factor operation. Alternatively, as outlined in
                       PCC1                                                                                                                                       PCC2
                                       Real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 8.18          Pext      Controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 8.21
                            Qs1                                                                                                                                Qs2
                            Ps1                                          iDC1            is             iext     iDC 2
                                                                                                                                                               Ps2
               Vga1 L                                                                          +
                                                                                                                                            Vta2 R+ r L V ia2 Lg2 Vga2
                        g1 ia1Vsa1   L R+ronVta1                                                                                                     on  sa2




                                                                                                                                                                              −




               −
                   +                                                                                                                                                      +
               Vgb1 Lg1 i Vsb1 L                                                    iloss1                                                  Vtb2 R+ r L V ib2 Lg2 Vgb2
                         b1      R+r Vta1    on         Averaged ideal                                                     Averaged ideal            on  sb2




                                                                                                                                                                              −




               −
      Vnull1       +
                                                                                              VDC      iloss2                                                             +       Vnull2
                                                      three-phase VSC1    C1                                      C2     three-phase VSC2
               Vgc1 Lg1                                                                                                                     Vtc2 R+ r L V ic2 Lg2 Vgc2
                          ic1 Vsc1 L R+ronVta1                                                                                                       on  sc2



                                                                                                                                                                              −




               −
                   +                                                                                                                                                      +


                                                                                               −

                       Qsref1                                                                                                                                   Qsref 2
                                                                                                                         Control and PWM
                                                      Control and PWM
                       Psref1                                                                                                                                   VDCref

                                                                                                                               Pext
                                                                                               (a)
                                         External device, that is, power source,
                       PCC1                                                                           Effective controlled DC-voltage power port (Fig. 12.6)      PCC2
                                  for the controlled DC-voltage power port (Fig. 12.5)
                            Qs1                                                                                                                                Qs2
                            Ps1                                          iDC1                         iexteq     idc2
                                                                                                                                                               Ps2
                                                                                          +
               Vga1 L                      V
                        g1 ia1Vsa1 L R+ ron ta1                                                                                             Vta2 R+ r L Vsa2 ia2 Lg2 Vga2
                                                                                                                                                     on
                                                                                                                                                                              −




               −
                   +                                                                                                                                                      +
               Vgb1 Lg1 i Vsb1 L R+ r Vta1                                                                                                  Vtb2 R+ r L Vsb2 ib2 Lg2 Vgb2
                         b1          on                                                                                 Averaged ideal               on
                                                                                                                                                                              −




               −
                                                        Averaged ideal P
      Vnull1       +
                                                                        exteq                       ilosseq                                                               +       Vnull2
                                                      three-phase VSC1                   VDC                      Ceq three-phase VSC2
               Vgc1 Lg1                    V                                                                                                Vtc2 R+ r L V ic2 Lg2 Vgc2
                          ic1 Vsc1 L R+ ron ta1                                                                                                      on  sc2
                                                                                                                                                                              −




               −
                   +                                                                                                                                                      +


                                                                                          −

                       Qsref1                                                                                                                                  Qsref 2
                                                      Control and PWM                                                    Control and PWM
                       Psref1                                                                                                                                  VDCref

                                                                                                                           Pexteq = VDC iexteq = −VDC iDC1
                                                                                               (b)

                       FIGURE 12.3 (a) Back-to-back HVDC system based on a real-/reactive-power controller and a




339
                       controlled DC-voltage power port; (b) Equivalent system where the two DC-bus capacitors and power-
                       loss current sources are merged.
340     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


                                 is           ip


                                      2C                 V1
                                                                                 Vta ia
                                             inp               Three-level       Vtb ib
 Effective capacitance: C     VDC       0                         NPC
                                                               Figure 6.6        Vtc ic
                                                         V2
                                      2C
                                              in

                                                                  4 4 4
                                                                PWM generator
                                                                 3x Figure 6.3


                                            DC-side voltage   m0
                                               balancer


                                                                maug-a
                                                                  maug-b
                                                                      maug-c
                  FIGURE 12.4 Block diagram of the three-level NPC.


Chapter 11, Qs2 can be independently controlled in a closed-loop system to regulate
Vsabc2 , in case the grid inductance Lg2 is signiﬁcant.
   As illustrated in Figure 12.1, converters of the back-to-back HVDC system are of
the three-level NPC type (Fig. 12.4), to allow an adequately large DC-bus voltage.
In Figure 12.3(a), however, these converters are represented by equivalent two-level
VSCs. This representation is justiﬁed based on the uniﬁed model of the two-level
VSC and three-level NPC, presented in Section 6.7.4. It was shown that a VSC can
be modeled as an ideal (lossless) two-level VSC whose DC side is in parallel with
a current source corresponding to the converter power loss, and an effective DC-bus
capacitance; the effective capacitance is half the capacitance of each of the DC-side
capacitors of the three-level NPC (Fig. 12.4). As discussed in Section 8.5, an internal
closed-loop control mechanism is required for the three-level NPC to balance the
voltages of the corresponding DC-side capacitors.
   Figure 12.3(b) illustrates a modiﬁed schematic diagram of the HVDC converter
system, equivalent to that of Figure 12.3(a), that is more convenient for the analysis and
control design. In the equivalent system of Figure 12.3(b), the DC-bus capacitor and
the power-loss current source in the real-/reactive-power controller are lumped with
their corresponding counterparts in the controlled DC-voltage power port. Thus, the
                                                                              HVDC SYSTEM MODEL                       341

                                                                                       PCC1
                                 VSC1
                                                                                 Qs1
 iDC1                                                                            Ps1
                 +
                                                     Vta1       ia1 R+ron L Vsa1          Lg1Vga1
                                                                                                 +




                                                                                                  −
                                                     Vtb1       ib1 R+ron L     Vsb1      Lg1Vgb1
                           Averaged ideal
              VDC                                                                                +           Vnull1




                                                                                                  −
                          three-phase VSC
                                                     Vtc1                                V
                                                                ic1 R+ron L      Vsc1 Lg1 gc1
                                                                                                 +




                                                                                                  −
                 −                                                                           Grid1


          maug-abc1
                            Saturation at ±1 ρ               abc              PLL1
                                                1       dq
            ρ1       Third-harmonic injected PWM
                      signal generator (Fig. 8.17)
                                                                                   ρ1
    VDC                     md1 mq1                   id1 iq1        Vsq1 Vsd1
                                                                                    iqref1
                                                                                              Reference          Qsref1
                            Compensators in dq-frame                                idref1 signal generator
                                                                                               (Fig. 12.9)       Psref1

FIGURE 12.5 Schematic diagram of the real-/reactive-power controller in the HVDC system
of Figure 12.3(b).




HVDC system of Figure 12.3(b) is composed of (i) a real-/reactive-power controller
with no DC-side capacitor and (ii) a controlled DC-voltage power port that has the
effective DC-side capacitance Ceq = C1 + C2 in parallel with the effective current
source ilosseq = iloss1 + iloss2 . The new real-/reactive-power controller and controlled
DC-voltage power port are shown in Figures 12.5 and 12.6, respectively, and constitute
the base for our subsequent developments.
    Based on the model of Figure 12.3(b), the real-/reactive-power controller
(Fig. 12.5) behaves as an external device and imposes the DC power Pexteq =
VDC iexteq = −VDC iDC1 on the DC side of the controlled DC-voltage power port
(Fig. 12.6). Thus, the main function of the controlled DC-voltage power port is to
regulate the DC voltage for the real-/reactive-power controller. As detailed in Sec-
tion 8.6, the DC-bus voltage regulation is achieved by adjusting Ps2 in a closed-
loop scheme that feedbacks VDC      2 and commands P
                                                         sref 2 , as Figure 12.6 illustrates.
For the controlled DC-voltage power port, Pexteq and the power-loss component
Plosseq = VDC ilosseq are both disturbance inputs. Plosseq is comparatively small and
fairly constant, and thus it can be compensated by an integrator in the compensator
Kv (s). However, Pexteq is highly variable within the power rating of the HVDC system
and therefore has a signiﬁcant dynamic impact on VDC      2 . Hence, a measure of P
                                                                                        exteq
is included in the control loop, as a feed-forward signal (Fig. 12.6).
    Based on the model of Figure 12.3(b) and the foregoing discussion, the back-to-
back HVDC system is operated as follows:
342        BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM

                                                                                                                  PCC2
                                                           VSC2
                                                                                                           Qs2
                    iexteq                  iDC2
                                                                                                           Ps2
                     +
                                                                          Vta2          ia2 R+ron L Vsa2               Lg2Vga2
                                                                                                                              +




                                                                                                                               −
                             ilosseq                                      Vtb2          ib2 R+ron L       Vsb2         Lg2Vgb2
Interface with an                                   Averaged ideal
                    VDC                      Ceq three-phase VSC                                                              +        Vnull2




                                                                                                                               −
 external system
                                                                          Vtc2          ic2 R+ron L             Vsc2 Lg2Vgc2
                                                                                                                              +




                                                                                                                               −
                     −                                                                                                     Grid2


                                   maug-abc2
                                                    Saturation at ±1 ρ2              abc                PLL2
                                                                                dq
                                       ρ2     Third-harmonic injected PWM
                                               signal generator (Fig. 8.17)
                                                                                                                ρ2
                      VDC                            md 2 mq2                 id2 iq2         Vsq2 Vsd2
                                                                                                                 iqref 2
                                                                                                                            Reference       Qsref 2
                                                    Compensators in dq -frame                                    idref 2 signal generator
                                                                                                                             (Fig. 12.9)


                                                                               Pexteq = VDC iexteq

                                                             DC-bus voltage
                                                              compensator                Saturation
                         VDC                  eV                                                      Psref 2
                               (.)2    −              −1       KV (s)

                    VDCref     (.)2                DC-bus voltage controller with feed-forward


FIGURE 12.6 Schematic diagram of the controlled DC-voltage power port in the HVDC
system of Figure 12.3(b).


    r The power exchange between Grid1 and Grid2 is controlled by Ps1 for which
      Psref 1 is the reference value. However, Psref 2 is an internal control variable that
      is commanded by the DC-bus voltage controller of the HVDC system. Conse-
      quently, Ps2 is a by-product of the control and thus not explicitly controllable.
      A positive (negative) Ps1 corresponds to the transfer of real power from Grid2
      to Grid1 (Grid1 to Grid2).
    r At both AC sides of the HVDC system, Qs1 and Qs2 can be regulated to arbitrary
      values within the ratings of VSC1 and VSC2, through their respective reference
      commands, Qsref 1 and Qsref 2 . Alternatively, as discussed in Chapter 11, it is
      possible to determine Qsref 1 and Qsref 2 in a closed-loop fashion, to regulate
      Vsabc1 and Vsabc2 , respectively. However, the latter option is not considered in
      this chapter.


12.4      HVDC SYSTEM CONTROL

12.4.1       Phase-Locked Loop (PLL)
Each VSC system in the HVDC converter system of Figure 12.3(b), that is, the real-/
reactive-power controller and the controlled DC-voltage power port, is controlled in
                                                                    HVDC SYSTEM CONTROL                  343


                Vsa
                                    abc                                                    Vsd
                Vsb
                                        dq                                                 Vsq
               Vsc
                                                        Saturation Compensator
                                             VCO
                                    ρ           兰     ω                 H(s)
                                                                                       ρ
                          FIGURE 12.7 Schematic diagram of the PLL.



a dq-frame. As Figures 12.5 and 12.6 show,

                                                  →
                                                  −
                                            idq = i e−jρ(t) ,                                         (12.7)
                                                   →
                                                   −
                                            Vsdq = Vs e−jρ(t) ,                                       (12.8)
                                            →
                                            −m = m ejρ(t) ,                                           (12.9)
                                                      dq


where ρ(t) is the phase angle of the corresponding PCC voltage. For each grid, ρ(t) is
obtained from a phase-locked loop (PLL) (see Section 8.3.4). Figure 12.7 illustrates
the PLL block diagram. The PLL transforms Vsabc to Vsdq and dynamically adjusts
the rotational speed of the dq-frame, ω, to fulﬁll Vsq = 0. This is achieved based on
the control law

               dρ
                  = ω(t) = H(p)Vsq (t),             ωmin ≤ ω ≤ ωmax ,                               (12.10)
               dt

where p = d( · )/dt is the differentiation operator and H(s) is the transfer function
of the PLL compensator. Thus, H(p)Vsq (t) represents the zero-state response of H(s)
to the input Vsq (t)1 . ωmin and ωmax are the lower and upper limits of ω, respectively.
    To analyze the PLL, let us consider a balanced grid voltage. Thus, without loss of
generality, we assume that Vgabc  is

                                         #   $
                                     
                                    Vga    s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ) ,
                                        = NV                                                        (12.11)



1 Throughout this chapter, we use F (p)x(t), where F (s) is a linear transfer function and x(t) is an

arbitrary time-domain signal, to represent the zero-state response of F (s) to the input x(t). In other words,
£ {F (p)x(t)} = F (s)X(s).
344     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM

                              #   $                  
                          
                         Vgb    s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 2π ,
                             = NV                                                  (12.12)
                                                    3
                              #   $                  
                          
                         Vgc    s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π .
                             = NV                                                  (12.13)
                                                    3

Let us also assume that the grid is relatively stiff, that is, Lg is relatively small, and
                    
therefore Vpabc ≈ Vgabc , Fig. 12.2. Then, based on (12.1)–(12.3), we deduce

                                 s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ) ,
                           Vxa = V                                                 (12.14)
                                                        
                                 s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 2π ,
                           Vxb = V                                                 (12.15)
                                                       3
                                                        
                                 s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 4π .
                           Vxc = V                                                 (12.16)
                                                       3

Substituting for Vxabc in (12.4)–(12.6), from (12.14)–(12.16), we deduce

                             s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ) + Vnull ,
                       Vsa = V                                                     (12.17)
                                                     
                             s cos ω0 t + θ0 − 2π + Vnull ,
                       Vsb = V                                                     (12.18)
                                                    3
                                                     
                                                  4π
                       Vsc = Vs cos ω0 t + θ0 −            + Vnull .               (12.19)
                                                    3

The space phasor corresponding to Vsabc can be derived based on (4.2) as

                → 2  j0
                −                2π         4π
                                                  
                                                     s ej(ω0 t+θ0 ) .
                Vs =   e Vsa + ej 3 Vsb + ej 3 Vsc = V                             (12.20)
                     3
                          2π      4π                                →
                                                                    −
Note that, since (ej0 + ej 3 + ej 3 ) ≡ 0, Vnull does not appear in Vs . Substituting
    →
    −
for Vs from (12.20) in (12.8), and decomposing the resultant into real and imaginary
components, we obtain

                                  s cos [ω0 t + θ0 − ρ(t)] ,
                            Vsd = V                                                (12.21)
                                  s sin [ω0 t + θ0 − ρ(t)] .
                            Vsq = V                                                (12.22)

Then, Vsq = 0 corresponds to ρ(t) = ω0 t + θ0 . Considering that, in general, the two
grids are not synchronized or can operate at different frequencies, we have

                                   ρ1 (t) = ω01 t + θ01 ,                          (12.23)
                                   ρ2 (t) = ω02 t + θ02 ,                          (12.24)

where θ01 and θ02 are the initial phase angles of Vsabc1 and Vsabc2 , respectively.
                                                        HVDC SYSTEM CONTROL           345

   As detailed in Section 8.3.5, H(s) must include an integral term. If the grid is stiff,
Vpabc and Vsabc are independent of iabc . Therefore, once the PLL reaches the steady
state, Vsq settles at zero, and ω(t) becomes constant and equal to the grid angular
frequency ω0 . However, if the grid is not stiff, Vpabc and Vsabc are also functions
of iabc , and thus Vsq and ω(t) are subject to excursions when id or iq changes (see
equations (11.16) and (11.18)). This, in turn, implies that the PLL dynamics are
coupled with the VSC system dynamics. As an approximation, however, we assume
a stiff grid condition and consider the PLL dynamics to be independent of those of
the VSC system. This subject and the approximation are discussed in Chapter 11.
   It was also discussed in Section 8.3.5 that in addition to its integral characteristic,
H(s) must exhibit a considerable gain drop at frequency 2ω0 , to accommodate opera-
tion under grid voltage imbalances. A voltage imbalance is often due to asymmetrical
faults, for example, a line-to-ground fault occurring at the PCC (close-in fault) or
within the power grid (remote fault). In Section 12.5, we analyze the performance of
the HVDC system subjected to a close-in asymmetrical fault.

12.4.2   dq-Frame Current-Control Scheme
In the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(b), both VSC systems, that is, the real-/reactive-
power controller and the controlled DC-voltage power port, are controlled based on
the current-mode control strategy. As detailed in Sections 8.4 and 8.4.1, the current-
mode control strategy is employed for controlling the real and reactive power that
each VSC system exchanges with the corresponding AC system (grid). Thus, we
adopt the current-mode control strategy to control (Ps1 , Qs1 ) in the real-/reactive-
power controller of Figure 12.5 and to control (Ps2 , Qs2 ) in the controlled DC-voltage
power port of Figure 12.6.
   Figure 12.8 illustrates a block diagram of the dq-frame current-control scheme,
which is a replicate of Figure 8.10. As Figure 12.8 shows, the d- and q-axis compen-
sators, kd (s) and kq (s), process the error signals ed = idref − id and eq = iqref − iq
and deliver the outputs ud and uq , respectively. Then, ud and uq are augmented by
feed-forward signals Vsd − Lωiq and Vsq + Lωid , and the signals Vtdref and Vtqref
are generated. Vtdref and Vtqref are equivalent to d- and q-axis components of the
VSC averaged AC-side terminal voltage; by the subscript ref we distinguish them
from their counterparts in the actual AC-side terminal voltage, that is, Vtd and Vtq .
The feed-forward compensation is (i) to decouple dynamics of id and iq , (ii) to en-
hance the disturbance rejection capability of the closed-loop system, (iii) to ensure
a bumpless system start-up, and (iv) to decouple dynamics of id and iq from those
of the grid. For the feed-forward compensation, ω, that is, the rotational speed of
the dq-frame, is obtained from the PLL. If the PLL dynamics are ignored, ω can be
replaced by the (constant) value ω0 .
   Figure 12.8 also shows that to generate md and mq , Vtdref and Vtqref are divided
by VDC (t)/2. This operation can be considered as a feed-forward compensation, and
has to compensate for the VSC conversion gain VDC (t)/2 and to ensure that Vtd and
Vtq (in the actual converter AC-side terminal voltage) are an accurate reproduction of,
respectively, Vtdref and Vtqref (produced by the current-control scheme of Fig. 12.8)
346     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


                                                            Vsd


                                                           Gff (s)
                            d-axis compensator
                           ed                         ud           Vtdref
      idref                         kd (s)                                    md
                      −
                                                               −

        id                      X            L
                                     Decoupling                        VDC
        ω                            feed-forward
                                                                         2
        iq                      X            L
                            q-axis compensator
                      −    eq                         uq             Vtqref
      iqref                         kq(s)                                     mq


                                                           Gff (s)


                                                            Vsq
FIGURE 12.8 Block diagram of the dq-frame current-control scheme for the real-/reactive-
power controller and the controlled DC-voltage power port.


in spite of DC-bus voltage ﬂuctuations. In Figure 12.8, VDC (t) can be replaced by
its steady-state value, that is, VDCref , if the DC-bus voltage is relatively constant.
Otherwise, its dynamically measured value should be used. Both these options and
their results are discussed in Section 12.5.5.
    As detailed in Section 8.4.1, kd (s) is a proportional-integral (PI) compensator,
                                                 kp s + ki
                                    kd (s) =               ,                    (12.25)
                                                     s

where kp and ki are the proportional and integral gains, respectively. Selecting
                                               L
                                     kp =         ,                             (12.26)
                                               τi
                                             R + ron
                                     ki =            ,                          (12.27)
                                               τi
                                                                 HVDC SYSTEM CONTROL               347

we have

                                    Id (s)                  1
                                             = Gi (s) =          ,                            (12.28)
                                   Idref (s)            τi s + 1

where the time constant τi is a design choice. Equation (12.28) indicates that if kp
and ki are selected based on (12.26) and (12.27), the step response of id (t) to idref (t)
is a ﬁrst-order exponential function with time constant τi . This is desirable since
the ﬁrst-order exponential response is smooth and exhibits no steady-state error or
overshoot. τi speciﬁes the speed of response and is usually selected in the range of
0.5–5 ms, depending on the VSC switching frequency, the desired speed of response,
the DC-bus voltage level, and the types of transients. The same compensator as kd (s)
can also be adopted for the q-axis compensator, that is, kq (s). Thus,

                                    Iq (s)                  1
                                             = Gi (s) =          .                            (12.29)
                                   Iqref (s)            τi s + 1

   Based on (4.83) and (4.84), the real and reactive power -     that the VSC.    system
exchanges
      -    with  the corresponding
                       .            PCC    are P s = (3/2)  Vsd id + V sq iq   and Qs =
(3/2) −Vsd iq + Vsq id , respectively. If the PCC voltage is balanced, then in steady
state Vsq = 0, and Vsd becomes equal to the amplitude of the PCC line-to-neutral
voltage. Therefore, Ps and Qs become proportional to id and iq , respectively. Thus,

                                                3
                                           Ps =   V s id ,                                    (12.30)
                                                2
                                                   3
                                           Qs = − V     s iq ,                                (12.31)
                                                   2

where V  s is the peak value of the line-to-neutral voltage of the PCC and assumed to
be a constant parameter.2 Figure 12.8 illustrates that idref and iqref are the reference
inputs to the VSC current-control scheme. Thus, in view of (12.30) and (12.31), idref
and iqref are calculated based on the desired real and reactive power, that is, Psref and
Qsref , as illustrated in the block diagram of Figure 12.9. Then, id and iq track idref and
iqref , based on the closed-loop transfer functions of (12.28) and (12.29). Substituting
for id (t) = Gi (p)idref (t) and iq (t) = Gi (p)iqref (t) in (12.30) and (12.31), we obtain

                                      Ps (t) = Gi (p)Psref (t),                               (12.32)
                                      Qs (t) = Gi (p)Qsref (t),                               (12.33)

2 In this chapter, for the sake of compactness in formulations and without loss of generality, we assume

that Grid1 and Grid2 have the same nominal voltage.
348      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


                                 Reference signal
                                    generator



                Psref                      2
                                                                  idref
                                          3Vˆs




               Qsref                        2
                                      −                           iqref
                                           3Vˆs


      FIGURE 12.9 Control block diagram of the current reference signal generator.


where Psref = (3/2)V                           s iqref , as illustrated in Figure 12.9.
                    s idref and Qsref = −(3/2)V
Equations (12.32) and (12.33) can be expressed in the Laplace domain as

                              Ps (s)      Qs (s)
                                       =           = Gi (s),                    (12.34)
                             Psref (s)   Qsref (s)

that is, Ps and Qs track their respective reference commands based on the transfer
function Gi (s), which is a ﬁrst-order transfer function with a time constant of τi ,
(12.28) and (12.29).


12.4.3   PWM Gating Signal Generator
Figure 12.10 illustrates a schematic diagram of the PWM gating signal generator
for each VSC of the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(b). The PWM signal generator
receives md and mq from the current-control scheme of Figure 12.8 and generates
mabc from a dq- to abc-frame transformation for which the angle ρ is provided by the
corresponding PLL. Then, mabc is augmented by a fraction of its third-order harmonic
to yield maug-abc . Finally, maug-abc is augmented by a DC offset, m0 , and delivered
to the gating signal generator (Fig. 6.3). m0 is the output of the DC-side voltage
equalizing scheme of the three-level NPC and is employed to balance the partial DC-
side voltages of the three-level NPC. The DC-side voltage equalizing scheme was
extensively discussed in Chapters 6–8 and is brieﬂy reviewed in the next subsection
for ease of reference.
                                                                                       HVDC SYSTEM CONTROL               349

                           dq - to abc - frame transformer for third-harmonic injection (Fig. 8.17)

                                                     ma                                    maug-a                     S1-1(a)
                                                                           3/2
                                                                                       −                              S4-1(a)
                                          dq                     (.)3            2/3                                  S1-2(a)
                                                                                                                      S4-2(a)
                                                     mb                                    maug-b                     S1-1(b)
  From PLL (Fig. 12.7)                                                     3/2                            PWM
                                                                                       −              gating signal   S4-1(b)
                t                                                 .3
 ρ (t) = ρ0 + 兰ω (τ) dτ                                          ()              2/3                   generator
                                                                                                      (3x Fig. 6.3)
                                                                                                                      S1-2(b)
                0                              abc                                                                    S4-2(b)
                                                     mc                                    maug-c
                                                                           3/2
                                                                                       −                              S1-1(c)
                                                                 (.)
                                                                       3                                              S4-1(c)
                                                                                 2/3



                      {
                                                                                                                      S1-2(c)
                          md               2
                                         (.)                                                                          S4-2(c)
  From dq -frame                                     m2
                                                     ›
 current controller
    (Fig. 12.8)           mq             (.)
                                               2


 From partial DC-side
   voltage balancer       m0
     (Fig. 12.11)

 FIGURE 12.10 Block diagram of PWM gating signal generator for the three-level NPC.


12.4.4       Partial DC-Side Voltage Equalization
As discussed in Chapter 6, a three-level NPC with a capacitive voltage divider at
its DC side requires an internal closed-loop control scheme to balance its partial
DC-side voltages. Figure 12.11 shows a schematic diagram of the DC-side voltage
equalizing scheme that is required for each three-level NPC in the HVDC system of
Figure 12.1. With reference to the three-level NPC of Figure 12.4, the DC-side voltage
equalizing scheme of Figure 12.11 processes the error signal e = V1 − V2 through the
compensator K(s) and provides the control signal u. Since V1 − V2 is distorted by a
relatively large third-order harmonic component, ﬁlter F (s) is required in the feedback
loop. As detailed in Section 8.5, Figure 8.20, the loop gain is proportional to Ps .
Therefore, to ensure the stability of the closed-loop system under both the rectifying
and the inverting modes of operation, u is multiplied by the sign of Ps , as Figure 12.11
shows, and m0 is generated for the PWM signal generator of Figure 12.10. The
procedures for designing F (s) and K(s) were outlined in Example 7.3.




FIGURE 12.11 Control block diagram of the partial DC-side voltage equalizing scheme for
the three-level NPC.
350      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


12.4.5   Power Flow Control
As explained in Section 12.3.2, Ps1 , that is, the real power that the real-/reactive-
power controller of Figure 12.5 delivers to Grid1, is the main control variable of
the back-to-back HVDC system and corresponds to a power transfer from Grid2 to
Grid1. As discussed in Section 12.4.2, Ps1 is controlled by Psref 1 based on a current-
mode control strategy. The transfer function from Psref 1 to Ps1 is a ﬁrst-order ﬁlter
as described by (12.34). It was also discussed in Section 12.3.2 that Ps1 results in a
DC power component, Pexteq , that is imposed on the DC bus of the controlled DC-
voltage power port (Fig. 12.3(b)). Pexteq acts as a disturbance input to the controlled
DC-voltage power port, but its impact can be considerably mitigated through a feed-
forward compensation mechanism. Hence, we formulate Pexteq in terms of Ps1 and
the system parameters. An estimate of Pexteq is used in the feed-forward scheme.
   Based on (7.91) and assuming a negligible resistive power loss, the power that is
exchanged with the AC-side of VSC1, that is, Pt1 , is

                                 2L              dPs1       2L             dQs1
                 Pt1 = Ps1 +               Ps1        +              Qs1        .     (12.35)
                                  s2
                                 3V               dt         s2
                                                            3V              dt

Since VSC1 is lossless, its DC-side power, that is, PDC1 = iDC1 VDC , is equal to Pt1 .
Thus,

                                   2L             dPs1       2L             dQs1
                PDC1 = Ps1 +                Ps1        +             Qs1         .    (12.36)
                                    s2
                                   3V              dt         s2
                                                             3V              dt

Figure 12.3(b) illustrates that iexteq = −iDC1 . Therefore, Pexteq = VDC iexteq is equal
to −PDC1 , and we deduce

                                    2L             dPs1       2L             dQs1
              Pexteq = −Ps1 −                Ps1        −             Qs1         .   (12.37)
                                     s2
                                    3V              dt         s2
                                                              3V              dt

Pexteq is imposed on the DC bus of the controlled DC-voltage power port of Fig-
ure 12.6. The controlled DC-voltage power port then transfers Pexteq to AC side of
VSC2 and, thus, to Grid2, in order to maintain the power balance and to regulate VDC .
Based on (12.37), during transients Pexteq can be larger or lower than −Ps1 , depending
on the polarity of Ps1 (and Qs1 ) and whether it is increasing or decreasing. However,
in an HVDC system, Psref 1 or Qsref 1 are usually changed as ramp functions rather
than stepwise. Therefore, the derivative terms dPs /dt and dQs /dt are small and may
be ignored in (12.37). Thus,

                             Pexteq ≈ −Ps1 = −Gi (s)Psref 1 .                         (12.38)

   Equation (12.38) suggests that a measure of Pexteq can be estimated by passing the
reference signal Psref 1 through a ﬁlter whose transfer function is Gi (s). This estimation
                                                          HVDC SYSTEM CONTROL           351

method is preferable over the calculation of Pexteq based on Pexteq = −iDC1 VDC . The
reasons are (i) to measure iDC1 , one has to utilize a (Hall effect) current transducer that
can be costly, and (ii) the measured iDC1 includes switching ripple that must be ﬁltered
since only the average value of Pexteq is of interest. The disadvantage of estimating
Pexteq is that (12.38) is developed based on the assumption of a balanced grid voltage.
If PCC1 is subjected to an asymmetrical fault, for example, a line-to-ground fault, then
Pexteq is a periodic function of time that consists of a DC component and a sinusoidal
component. While the DC component is exchanged with the converter DC side, the
sinusoidal component results in periodic ﬂuctuations superimposed on the DC-bus
voltage. We will further demonstrate in Section 12.5.4 that subsequent to a fault
inception, the (absolute value of the) DC component of Pexteq drops stepwise from its
prefault value to a smaller value, even if Psref 1 is kept constant. However, (12.38) fails
to reveal such a change in Pexteq . Consequently, the feed-forward compensation based
on (12.38) cannot mitigate DC-bus voltage disturbances due to faults or unbalanced
voltage grid conditions.

12.4.6     DC-Bus Voltage Regulation
In the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(b), the DC-bus voltage regulation is a function of
the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 12.6 and is achieved by controlling
Ps2 . As discussed in Section 12.4.2, Ps2 is controlled through a current-control mech-
anism for which Psref 2 and Gi (s) are the reference command and the transfer function,
respectively. Psref 2 is, in turn, the output of the DC-bus voltage controller and is also
augmented by a measure of Pexteq as a feed-forward signal (Fig. 12.6). The model
and control methodology for the controlled DC-voltage power port are extensively
discussed in Section 8.6, but are brieﬂy reviewed here for ease of reference.
    Similar to (12.36), with respect to Figure 12.6, the DC-side power of VSC2, that is,
PDC2 = VDC iDC2 , is expressed as

                                   2L            dPs2      2L           dQs2
                   PDC2 = Ps2 +            Ps2        +           Qs2        .      (12.39)
                                    s2
                                   3V             dt        s2
                                                           3V            dt

The power-balance equation for the DC side of VSC2 requires that

                                                 dWCeq
                            Pexteq − Plosseq −         = PDC2 ,                    (12.40)
                                                  dt
where Pexteq = VDC iexteq , Plosseq = VDC ilosseq , and WCeq is the energy stored in the
DC-bus capacitor. Substituting for WCeq = (1/2)Ceq VDC  2 and also for P from (12.39)
                                                                         s2
in (12.40), we obtain
               2
     Ceq       dVDC                      2L               dQs2         2L       dPs2
                    = Pexteq − Plosseq −            Qs2        − Ps2 −      Ps2      .
      2         dt                        s2
                                         3V                dt           s2
                                                                       3V        dt
                                                                                    (12.41)
352      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


Equation (12.41) describes a ﬁrst-order plant for which VDC    2 is the output, P is the
                                                                                   s2
control input, and Plosseq , Pexteq , and Qs2 are the disturbance inputs. Figure 12.6 illus-
trates that −Kv (s) processes the error signal ev = VDCref 2    − VDC2 and issues P         3
                                                                                     sref 2 .
Psref 2 is then tracked by Ps2 based on the transfer function Gi (s) = 1/(τi s + 1).
Plosseq is a relatively small value and a function of the operating point, as discussed
in Section 5.2.3, but it typically changes over a narrow range of tolerance and, there-
fore, can be considered as a constant disturbance that can be rejected via an integral
term included in Kv (s). However, Pexteq can assume any value between the negative
rated power and the positive rated power of the HVDC system, and can cause VDC            2
                                   2
to signiﬁcantly deviate from VDCref . Therefore, as shown in Figure 12.6, a measure
of Pexteq is added as a feed-forward signal to the output of Kv (s). It should be noted
that with typical system parameters, the impact of Qs2 on VDC       2 is insigniﬁcant and

requires no compensation.
    With respect to the control input Ps2 , the plant described by (12.41) is nonlinear
due to the term Ps2 dPs2 /dt. To design Kv (s), we linearize (12.41) as4
                                       %                                         &
                             2
                          d VDC     2                      2LPs2ss         d Ps2
                                =−       Ps2 +                                     ,       (12.42)
                            dt     Ceq                       s2
                                                            3V               dt

where superscript ∼ and index ss represent small-signal perturbations and steady-
state values, respectively. Taking Laplace transform from both sides of (12.42), we
obtain the transfer function Gv (s) = VDC
                                       2 /P as
                                             s2

                                                                   
                                          2 (s)
                                         VDC                   2        τs + 1
                             Gv (s) =               =−                         ,           (12.43)
                                          Ps2 (s)             Ceq          s

where the time constant τ is

                                                    2LPs2ss
                                             τ=             .                              (12.44)
                                                      s2
                                                     3V

Replacing the derivative terms by zero in (12.41), we deduce

                                      Ps2ss = Pexteqss − Plosseq .                         (12.45)

If Psref 1 is constant, then Ps1 = Psref 1 is in steady state. Hence, based on (12.38), we
have Pexteqss = −Psref 1 , and (12.45) can be rewritten as

                                     Ps2ss = −Psref 1 − Plosseq .                          (12.46)

3 The negative sign of the compensator is to compensate for the plant negative gain.
4 We usually do not include disturbances in a small-signal analysis since we are concerned about the

closed-loop stability in which disturbance signals play no role.
                HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                        353

      DC-bus voltage controller                   Composite control plant
                                        Power controller      DC-bus voltage dynamics
          e˜V    Compensator
                                  P˜ sref 2
                                          dynamics ˜
                                                        Ps2                   τs + 1
 0              − KV (s)                      Gi (s)          GV (s) = − ( 2 )          V˜ 2DC
          −                                                               Ceq s


          FIGURE 12.12 Control block diagram of the DC-bus voltage regulator.


If | Psref 1 |  Plosseq , (12.46) can be approximated as

                                              Ps2ss ≈ −Psref 1 .                        (12.47)

Substituting for Ps2ss in (12.44), from (12.47), we conclude

                                                       2LPsref 1
                                              τ=−                .                      (12.48)
                                                          s2
                                                         3V

   Based on (12.48), τ is proportional to the (constant) real-power ﬂow command
Psref 1 . As (12.48) suggests, if Psref 1 is small, τ is negligible and the plant Gv (s) is
predominantly an integrator. As the absolute value of Psref 1 is increased, |τ| increases
and can cause a considerable phase shift to the loop gain. If Psref 1 is negative, that is,
the power ﬂows from Grid1 to Grid2 (Fig. 12.3(b)), τ is positive and adds to the loop
gain phase. However, if Psref 1 is positive, corresponding to a power ﬂow from Grid2
to Grid1, then τ is negative and imposes a phase delay on the loop gain. A negative
τ, which corresponds to a non-minimum-phase zero for Gv (s), has a destabilizing
effect on the closed-loop system. Thus, to account for the worst-case scenario, we
design Kv (s) for the positive rated value of Psref 1 . Note that if Psref 1 is positive,
Pexteq is negative based on (12.38), and therefore, the controlled DC-voltage power
port of Figure 12.6 operates in the rectifying mode of operation. As discussed in
Section 8.6, in the rectifying mode of operation, the controlled DC-voltage power
port is a non-minimum-phase plant.
   Figure 12.12 illustrates a control block diagram of the DC-bus voltage controller,
based on the linearized model of (12.43). As Figure 12.12 shows, Kv (s) commands
Psref 2 (s). However, the plant control input is Ps2 , which is related to Psref 2 (s) through
the transfer function Gi (s). Therefore, the transfer function of the effective plant
is Gi (s)Gv (s). Kv (s) must include an integral term to compensate for the constant
disturbance Plosseq and to ensure zero steady-state error.


12.5 HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL
FAULT

Thus far, we have discussed the control of the back-to-back HVDC system of
Figure 12.1 (or its equivalent system, i.e., Fig. 12.3(b)) under balanced voltage grid
354      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


conditions. However, if one of the PCCs (or both) is subjected to an asymmetrical
fault, for example, a line-to-ground fault, the HVDC system has to accommodate
the grid voltage imbalance and continue its operation, at least temporarily. In this
section, we analyze the performance of the HVDC system under unbalanced grid
conditions.


12.5.1   PCC Voltage Under an Asymmetrical Fault
When the PCC is subjected to an asymmetrical fault, its voltage becomes unbalanced.
Based on the theory of symmetrical components [99], an unbalanced three-phase
voltage can be formulated as the superposition of a positive-sequence component, a
negative-sequence component, and a zero-sequence component. The formal mathe-
matical formulation is


            s cos (ω0 t + θ0 )
 Vsa (t) = aV                                     s cos (ω0 t + θ0 + ψ)
                                               + bV                                    +       Vs0 (t) ,
                                                                                
                                      2π                                      4π
            s cos ω0 t + θ0 −
 Vsb (t) = aV                                     s cos ω0 t + θ0 + ψ −
                                               + bV                                    +       Vs0 (t) ,
                                       3                                       3
                                                                                
                                      4π                                      2π
            s cos ω0 t + θ0 −
 Vsc (t) = aV                                     s cos ω0 t + θ0 + ψ −
                                               + bV                                    +      Vs0 (t) ,
                                       3                                       3                 
                                                                                     zero-sequence
                  positive-sequence                       negative-sequence

                                                                                                 (12.49)

       s and θ0 are the amplitude and the phase angle of the line-to-neutral voltage of
 where V
the otherwise sound PCC, respectively. ψ is the phase angle of the negative-sequence
component, relative to the positive-sequence component, when the PCC voltage is
unbalanced. Parameters a and b are, respectively, the amplitudes of the positive- and
negative-sequence components of (unbalanced) Vsabc , relative to V  s , and thus specify
the degree of imbalance. For example, a balanced three-phase voltage is a special
case of (12.49), where a = 1, b = 0, and Vs0 (t) ≡ 0.
   Based on (4.2), the space phasor corresponding to Vsabc is

                       →
                       −                        s e−j(ω0 t+θ0 +ψ) .
                             s ej(ω0 t+θ0 ) + bV
                       Vs = aV                                                                   (12.50)
                                                            
                                      →+
                                      −                      →−
                                                             −
                                      Vs                     Vs

                                                        →
                                                        −          #           2π    4π
                                                                                        $
Note that Vs0 (t) does not appear in the expression for Vs since ej0 + ej 3 + ej 3 ≡
0.
                                         →
                                         −
   Equation (12.50) indicates that Vs is composed of two components: (i) the
                                              →
                                              −         s ej(ω0 t+θ0 ) , which we refer to
counterclockwise rotating space phasor Vs + = aV
as positive-sequence space phasor, and (ii) the clockwise rotating space phasor
                HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                 355

→−
−          s e−j(ω0 t+θ0 +ψ) , which we refer to as negative-sequence space phasor. The
Vs = bV
positive- and negative-sequence components of Vsabc can be retrieved by applying
                          →
                          −         →
                                    −
(4.7) to, respectively, Vs + and Vs − . This yields

                                                 −
                                                  →        
                                     +
                                    Vsa  (t) = Re Vs + e−j0 ,                   (12.51)
                                                 −
                                                  →          
                                     +                    2π
                                    Vsb  (t) = Re Vs + e−j 3 ,                  (12.52)
                                                 −
                                                  →       4π
                                                             
                                    Vsc+ (t) = Re Vs + e−j 3 ,                  (12.53)


and
                                                 −
                                                  →        
                                     −
                                    Vsa  (t) = Re Vs − e−j0 ,                   (12.54)
                                                 −
                                                  →          
                                     −                    2π
                                    Vsb  (t) = Re Vs − e−j 3 ,                  (12.55)
                                                 −
                                                  →       4π
                                                             
                                    Vsc− (t) = Re Vs − e−j 3 ,                  (12.56)


where Re{·} is the real-part operator. It should, however, be noted that Vsabc cannot
                  →
                  −
be retrieved from Vs unless Vs0 (t) is known.5


   EXAMPLE 12.1               PCC Voltage Under A Line-to-Ground Fault
   Figure 12.13 illustrates a scenario in which the PCC is subjected to a line-to-
   ground fault. Consider that the fault is due to a short circuit between phase c
   of the PCC and the ground, that is, Vpc ≡ 0. Thus, based on (12.1)–(12.3), we
   have

                                                   1
                                            Vxa ≈    Vpa ,
                                                  N
                                                   1
                                            Vxb ≈ Vpb ,
                                                  N
                                            Vxc ≈ 0.
                                                                                (12.57)



5 The zero-sequence component of the three-phase signal f
        -                      .                         abc (t) is given as
f 0 (t) = fa (t) + fb (t) + fc (t) /3.
356    BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


                   Vxa                Vya         L′l        Vpa   L′i         V ′ga
       ia Vsa

                   Vxb                Vyb         L′l        Vpb   L′i     V ′gb
       ib Vsb
                         Vnull
                   Vxc                Vyc         L′l        Vpc   L′i         V ′gc
       ic Vsc


                                                              Line-to-ground

FIGURE 12.13 Schematic diagram of the interface transformer and AC Systems under a
line-to-ground fault.


      Assuming that Vpa ≈ Vga   and V                                       
                                      pb ≈ Vgb , and substituting for Vga and Vgb
  in (12.57), respectively, from (12.11) and (12.12), we deduce

                               s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ) ,
                         Vxa ≈ V
                                                       
                                                    2π
                         Vxb ≈ Vs cos ω0 t + θ0 −         ,
                                                      3
                         Vxc ≈ 0.
                                                                                       (12.58)


  Based on (12.4)–(12.6) and (12.58), we have

                           s cos (ω0 t + θ0 ) + Vnull ,
                     Vsa ≈ V
                                                   
                                                2π
                     Vsb ≈ Vs cos ω0 t + θ0 −            + Vnull ,
                                                  3
                     Vsc ≈ Vnull ,
                                                                                       (12.59)


  which constitute an unbalanced three-phase voltage. Based on (4.2), we deduce

                     → 2  j(ω0 t+θ0 ) 1  −j(ω0 t+θ0 − π )
                     −
                     V s = Vs e       + Vs e            3 .                            (12.60)
                          3         3                
                                 →+
                                 −                      →−
                                                        −
                                 Vs                     Vs


  Comparing (12.50) and (12.60), one concludes that a = 2/3, b = 1/3, and ψ =
  −π/3 under the line-to-ground fault condition. Based on (12.49), Vsabc can be
              HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                     357

   expressed as
          2                           1       #              π$
 Vsa (t) =  Vs cos (ω0 t + θ0 )      + V  s cos ω0 t + θ0 −         + Vnull (t) ,
          3                            3                       3
                                                                
          2                    2π     1                      5π
 Vsb (t) = V s cos ω0 t + θ0 −       + V  s cos ω0 t + θ0 −          + Vnull (t) ,
          3                      3     3                        3
                                  
          2                    4π      1
 Vsc (t) = Vs cos ω0 t + θ0 −         + V   s cos (ω0 t + θ0 − π) + Vnull (t) ,
          3                      3      3                                   
                                                               zero-sequence
                   positive-sequence               negative-sequence

                                                                                  (12.61)

   where Vnull is the zero-sequence component of Vsabc .

12.5.2   Performance of PLL Under an Asymmetrical Fault
                 →
                 −
Substituting for Vs from (12.50) in (12.8), and decomposing the result into its real
and imaginary components, we obtain

                                              s cos [ω0 t + θ0 + ψ + ρ(t)] , (12.62)
                 s cos [ω0 t + θ0 − ρ(t)] + bV
          Vsd = aV
                                              s sin [ω0 t + θ0 + ψ + ρ(t)] . (12.63)
                 s sin [ω0 t + θ0 − ρ(t)] − bV
          Vsq = aV

The PLL function is to synchronize the dq-frame to Vsabc , that is, to ensure that
ρ(t) = ω0 t + θ0 in the steady state. Thus, assuming a small-signal perturbation, that is,
ρ(t) ≈ ω0 t + θ0 , we can rewrite (12.63) as

                                                 s sin [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ]
                    s sin [ω0 t + θ0 − ρ(t)] − bV
             Vsq = aV
                      s [ω0 t + θ0 − ρ(t)] − bV
                   ≈ aV                        s sin [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] .       (12.64)

Substituting for Vsq in (12.10), we ﬁnd

     dρ    s H(p) [ω0 t + θ0 − ρ(t)] − bV
                                         s H(p) sin [2 (ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] ,
        = aV                                                                      (12.65)
     dt

where p = d(·)/dt is the differentiation operator.
   Equation (12.65) can be associated with a classical feedback mechanism for which
                                                           s H(s)/s is the open-loop
ω0 t + θ0 is the reference input, ρ(t) is the output, and aV
                                     
transfer function. Input d(t) = −bVs sin[2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ]H(p) represents a distur-
bance to the control loop. Figure 12.14 shows a general control block diagram of the
PLL that covers both balanced and unbalanced conditions. Under normal operating
condition, (a, b) = (1, 0), and the block diagram of Figure 12.14 becomes an equiv-
alent to its counterpart under balanced grid conditions, that is, Figure 8.4. However,
when the PCC is subjected to an asymmetrical fault, the coefﬁcient a becomes less
than unity and the coefﬁcient b assumes a nonzero value; consequently, (i) the PLL
358     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


                                        sin[2(ω 0t + θ 0 ) + ψ]


                                               −bVˆs


                                               H (s)

                                 Compensator      d Saturation
      ω 0t + θ 0          e
                               aVˆs    H (s)                  ω        1           ρ
                      −                                                s


FIGURE 12.14 Control block diagram of the PLL: (a) a = 1 and b = 0 for a balanced
grid condition; (b) a < 1 and b =
                                / 0 for an unbalanced grid condition, for example, due to an
asymmetrical fault.


loop gain magnitude drops by 100(1 − a)%, for example, 33% for a line-to-ground
fault, and (ii) ω(t) gets distorted by a sinusoidal disturbance that would not exist under
a balanced grid condition. The magnitude drop may slightly reduce the closed-loop
speed of response but poses no instability issues. However, the disturbance input
results in ﬂuctuations in ω and ρ at the frequency 2ω0 . These ﬂuctuations, in turn,
generate additional harmonics in the VSC terminal voltage and current. Thus, to
attenuate the disturbance, H(s) must exhibit an appreciable gain drop at 2ω0 . This
can be achieved, for example, by inclusion of the complex-conjugate zeros ±j(2ω0 )
in H(s). In Example 8.1, a procedure to design H(s) was presented.


12.5.3 Performance of dq-Frame Current-Control Scheme Under
an Asymmetrical Fault
In this section, we analyze the performance of the d- and q-axis current-control
scheme under an unbalanced PCC voltage, subsequent to an asymmetrical fault. For
both the real-/reactive-power controller of Figure 12.5 and the controlled DC-voltage
power port of Figure 12.6, the model of the AC side is given by (8.5), repeated here
as (12.66):

                                 →
                                 −
                                d i              → −
                                                 −    → −  →
                              L     = −(R + ron ) i + Vt − Vs .                     (12.66)
                                 dt

Expressing each space phasor of (12.66) in terms of dq-frame components, that is,
→
−
f = (fd + jfq )ejρ , we obtain

                          did
                      L       = (Lω)iq − (R + ron )id + Vtd − Vsd ,                 (12.67)
                          dt
                HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                  359

                             diq
                         L       = −(Lω)id − (R + ron )iq + Vtq − Vsq ,          (12.68)
                             dt

where ω = dρ/dt. If the grid voltage is balanced, Vsd and Vsq are given by (12.21)
and (12.22), which, since ρ(t) = ω0 t + θ0 , can be rewritten as

                                                     s ,
                                               Vsd = V                           (12.69)
                                               Vsq = 0.                          (12.70)


Under an asymmetrical fault condition, Vsd and Vsq are given by (12.62) and (12.63),
which can be written as

                                          s cos [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] ,
                                    s + bV
                             Vsd = aV                                            (12.71)
                                     s sin [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] .
                             Vsq = −bV                                           (12.72)


A comparison between (12.72) and (12.70) reveals that when an asymmetrical fault
occurs, Vsq assumes a sinusoidal ripple component while retaining its zero DC compo-
nent. However, a comparison between (12.71) and (12.69) indicates that Vsd assumes
a sinusoidal ripple component in addition to a level drop in its DC component, from
s to aV
V       s . As indicated by (12.67) and (12.68), if not properly compensated, the ripple
components of Vsd and Vsq result in ﬂuctuations in id and iq ; the ﬂuctuations, in turn,
entail imbalance and generation of a positive-sequence third-order harmonic in iabc .6
The impact of Vsd and Vsq on id and iq , as explained above, can be mitigated by a
feed-forward mechanism as follows.
     Figure 12.8 illustrates that (ﬁltered) measures of Vsd and Vsq are added to the
control signals ud and uq ; the transfer function of the ﬁlters is Gff (s). Thus, any
change in Vsd and/or Vsq is rapidly communicated to Vtdref and/or Vtqref , such that
the voltage drop across the interface reactors remains merely a function of id and
iq .
     Since the frequency of the ripple components of Vsd and Vsq is 2ω0 , the bandwidth
of Gff (s) must be adequately larger than 2ω0 , in order for the feed-forward system to
be effective. Otherwise, the gain drop and the phase delay associated with Gff (j2ω0 )
result in deviations of the measured values of Vsd and Vsq from their actual values,
and render the feed-forward compensation ineffective. In addition, the switching
frequency must be adequately large to enable the VSC to faithfully reproduce the
ripple components of Vsd and Vsq . If these conditions are satisﬁed, id and iq contain
no ripple components due to ﬂuctuations in Vsd and Vsq , and iabc remains more or
less balanced and distortion-free under the fault. A detailed explanation of the feed-
forward compensation and its technical merits was presented in Section 3.4.

6 This will be formally proven in Section 12.5.7.
360      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


12.5.4   Dynamics of DC-Bus Voltage Under an Asymmetrical Fault
Consider the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(b) and assume that both PCCs are subjected
to asymmetrical faults. For the compactness of formulations and without loss of
generality, we assume that the frequencies of both grids are equal, that is, ω0 . However,
their initial phase angles can be different, that is, θ01 =
                                                          / θ02 . We further assume that
both sides of the HVDC system exchange power with their corresponding grids at
unity power factor, that is, Qsref = Qs = 0. Based on the developments of Sections
12.4.1 and 12.5.2, we can express the dq-frame components of each PCC voltage
as

                                    s cos [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] ,
                              s + bV
                       Vsd = aV                                                   (12.73)
                               s sin [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] ,
                       Vsq = −bV                                                  (12.74)

where coefﬁcients a and b depend on the type of fault and the degree of voltage
imbalance. For example, a = 1 and b = 0 represent a sound grid, (12.69) and (12.70),
whereas a = 2/3 and b = 1/3 represent a grid that is subjected to a line-to-ground
fault, (12.71) and (12.72), and so on. Based on (4.83) and since iq = 0, the (actual)
real power that is exchanged with the PCC is

                             3                                
                                      s cos [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] id .
                  Ps-act =     aVs + bV                                           (12.75)
                             2

                             s ) in (12.75), we have
Substituting for id = 2Ps /(3V

                      Ps-act = aPs + bPs cos [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] .                (12.76)

    It should be noted that Ps-act represents the real power that is actually exchanged
with the grid and is not the same as Ps . Based on (12.30), Ps = (3/2)V     s id deﬁnes
a quantity that is equivalent to Ps-act only if the PCC voltage is balanced; that is,
Ps-act = Ps when a = 1 and b = 0. However, under an unbalanced grid condition
Ps is not equal to Ps-act but, as (12.76) indicates, appears as a factor in the ex-
pression for the DC component (or the average value) of Ps-act . The DC compo-
nent of Ps-act , that is, aPs , is proportional to and smaller in absolute value than
Ps , since a ≤ 1. Moreover, under an unbalanced grid condition b is nonzero and,
thus, Ps-act includes an AC ripple component in addition to its DC component. The
ripple component is a sinusoidal function of time whose amplitude and frequency
are bPs and 2ω0 , respectively. Similar conclusions can be made also for Qs-act
and Qs .
    The VSC DC-side power is given by

                                 PDC = Pt
                                       = Ps-act + PL ,                            (12.77)
                 HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                      361

where PL , the instantaneous power of the interface reactors, is given by (4.41) as

                                            −→
                                   3L        d i −→∗
                              PL =    Re            i
                                    2         dt
                                           !                         "
                                     3L      d(idq ejρ )
                                   =    Re               (idq ejρ )∗
                                      2          dt
                                        3L    di2d   di2q
                                   =               +
                                         4    dt     dt

                                        3L di2d
                                   =            , since iq = 0.                        (12.78)
                                         4 dt

                  s ), (12.78) can be rewritten as
Since id = 2Ps /(3V

                                                     L dPs2
                                             PL =           .                          (12.79)
                                                     s2 dt
                                                    3V

Substituting for Ps-act and PL in (12.77), respectively, from (12.76) and (12.79), we
deduce the VSC terminal power as


                                        L dPs2
                 PDC =       aPs +                   + bPs cos [2(ω0 t + θ0 ) + ψ] .   (12.80)
                                        s2 dt
                                       3V

With reference to the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(b), the DC-bus voltage dynamics
can be formulated based on the principle of power balance as

                                       2
                             Ceq       dVDC
                                            = Pexteq − Plosseq − PDC2
                              2         dt
                                                ≈ Pexteq − PDC2
                                                ≈ −PDC1 − PDC2 .                       (12.81)

Substituting for PDC1 and PDC2 from the generic equation (12.80) in (12.81), we
have

              2                      2                                      2
    Ceq       dVDC               L dPs1                                 L dPs2
                   = − a1 Ps1 +                        −    a2 Ps2 +
     2         dt                s2 dt
                                3V                                      s2 dt
                                                                       3V
      − {b1 Ps1 cos [2(ω0 t + θ01 ) + ψ1 ] + b2 Ps2 cos [2(ω0 t + θ02 ) + ψ2 ]} , (12.82)
362     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


or equivalently


     2                                         2                                            2
   dVDC                2                   L dPs1                   2                     L dPs2
        =−                       a1 Ps1 +                  −                  a2 Ps2 +
    dt                Ceq                  s2 dt
                                          3V                       Ceq                    s2 dt
                                                                                         3V
                                                                         
                       1
              −                  b1 Ps1 ej(2θ01 +ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2 ej(2θ02 +ψ2 ) ej2ω0 t
                      Ceq
                                                                           
                       1
              −                  b1 Ps1 e−j(2θ01 +ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2 e−j(2θ02 +ψ2 ) e−j2ω0 t .      (12.83)
                      Ceq


Based on (12.82) or (12.83), VDC 2 includes a steady-state AC component with fre-
                                                         2 as
quency 2ω0 , if b1 or b2 is nonzero. Let us approximate VDC


   2
  VDC ≈ y0 (t) + yα (t) cos (2ω0 t) − yβ (t) sin (2ω0 t)
                         1-                .          1-                .
          = y0 (t) +       yα (t) + jyβ (t) ej2ω0 t +   yα (t) − jyβ (t) e−j2ω0 t , (12.84)
                         2                            2

where the time-varying coefﬁcients y0 (t), yα (t), and yβ (t) settle at respective constant
values in the steady state. Formulation of VDC  2 as (12.84) is based on the assumption

that y0 (t), yα (t), and yβ (t) change considerably slower than cos (2ω0 t) and sin (2ω0 t).
Taking derivative of (12.84), we obtain


                2
              dVDC   dy0
                   =
               dt     dt
                                                       
                         1 dyα    dyβ          0         1 j2ω t
                     +         +j       + jω0 yα + jyβ e 0
                         2 dt      dt
                                                      
                         1 dyα    dyβ
                     +         −j       − jω0 (yα − jyβ ) e−j2ω0 t .                           (12.85)
                         2 dt      dt


Substituting for dVDC  2 /dt from (12.85) in (12.83) and equating the terms that are

multiples of ej0ω0 t , ej2ω0 t , and e−j2ω0 t to their counterparts from the other side of the
resultant equation, we deduce

                                                2                                          2
      dy0           2                       L dPs1                 2                     L dPs2
          =−                    a1 Ps1 +                  −                  a2 Ps2 +               ,
       dt          Ceq                      s2 dt
                                           3V                     Ceq                    s2 dt
                                                                                        3V
                                                                                               (12.86)
             HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                     363

and
                                
 1 dyα    dyβ         0          1
       +j       + jω0 yα + jyβ =
 2 dt      dt
                                                                   
                    1
               −           b1 Ps1 ej(2θ01 +ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2 ej(2θ02 +ψ2 ) ,         (12.87)
                   Ceq
                                
 1 dyα    dyβ         0          1
       −j       − jω0 yα − jyβ =
 2 dt      dt
                                                                      
                    1
               −           b1 Ps1 e−j(2θ01 +ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2 e−j(2θ02 +ψ2 ) .       (12.88)
                   Ceq

    Equation (12.86) describes the dynamics of the DC component of VDC   2 , that is,

y0 . Equation (12.87) embeds two equations describing the dynamics of the direct
and quadrature components of the AC component of VDC     2 , that is, y and y . It
                                                                       α       β
can be shown that (12.88) is equivalent to (12.87) and thus superﬂuous. Therefore,
we proceed with our developments by decomposing (12.87) into real and imaginary
components, as

   dyα             2
       = 2ω0 yβ −     [b1 Ps1 cos (2θ01 + ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2 cos (2θ02 + ψ2 )] , (12.89)
    dt            Ceq
   dyβ              2
       = −2ω0 yα −     [b1 Ps1 sin (2θ01 + ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2 sin (2θ02 + ψ2 )] . (12.90)
    dt             Ceq

Equations (12.89) and (12.90) indicate that the dynamics of yα and yβ are coupled
but independent of those of y0 . Likewise, y0 is independent of yα or yβ . Let us rewrite
(12.84) as

                          2
                         VDC = y0 (t) + 
                                        y(t) cos [2ω0 t + η(t)] ,                (12.91)

where
                                       /
                                   
                                   y=    yα2 + yβ2 ,
                                              
                                               yβ
                                   η = tan−1         .
                                               yα
                                                                                 (12.92)

Equation (12.92) indicates that the amplitude and the phase angle of the AC component
     2 are functions of y and y . The steady-state values of y and y can be
of VDC                      α        β                                α       β
determined by solving (12.89) and (12.90), where dyα /dt and dyβ /dt are set to zero.
364      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


The result is


                    1
        yβss =           [b1 Ps1ss cos (2θ01 + ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2ss cos (2θ02 + ψ2 )] ,         (12.93)
                  Ceq ω0
                      1
        yαss = −           [b1 Ps1ss sin (2θ01 + ψ1 ) + b2 Ps2ss sin (2θ02 + ψ2 )] , (12.94)
                    Ceq ω0


where subscript ss denotes the steady-state value. It then follows from the substitution
of yαss and yβss in (12.92), from (12.93) and (12.94), that


        
            (b1 Ps1ss )2 + (b2 Ps2ss )2 + 2b1 b2 Ps1ss Ps2ss cos [2 (θ01 − θ02 ) + (ψ1 − ψ2 )]

yss =                                                                                          .
                                                 Ceq ω0
                                                                                           (12.95)


It is preferable to express 
                            yss in terms of Psref 1 , that is, the power-ﬂow command of
the HVDC system. To that end, we ﬁrst set the left-hand side of (12.86) to zero and
obtain

                                                                      
                                           a1                       a1
                           Ps2ss = −                Ps1ss = −                Psref 1 .     (12.96)
                                           a2                    a2
                                                    Psref 1



Then, we substitute in (12.95) for Ps1ss = Psref 1 and Ps2ss = −(a1 /a2 )Psref 1 , and
deduce

        
            (a1 b2 )2 + (a2 b1 )2 − 2 (a1 b2 )(a2 b1 ) cos [2 (θ01 − θ02 ) + (ψ1 − ψ2 )]

yss =                                                                                    |Psref 1 |.
                                            a2 Ceq ω0
                                                                                           (12.97)


   Equation (12.97) indicates that the steady-state amplitude of the AC component
     2 , that is, 
of VDC             yss , depends on the parameters a and b and thus on the type of the
       yss is also a function of AC Systems’ initial phase angles. Furthermore, 
fault.                                                                          yss is
proportional to the absolute value of the power ﬂow command Psref 1 and inversely
proportional to the effective DC-bus capacitance. The AC component of VDC   2 results

in a periodic overvoltage for which the DC-bus capacitor and the VSC switch cells
              HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                          365

must be rated. To calculate the steady-state overvoltage, let us rewrite (12.91) as
                            
                     VDC =    y0ss + 
                                     yss cos (2ω0 t + η)
                            2                                 
                                           
                                           yss
                           = y0ss 1 +             cos (2ω0 t + η)
                                           y0ss
                                  2            
                            √               
                                            yss
                           = y0ss 1 +             cos(2ω0 t + η).                      (12.98)
                                           y0ss

                                                                                     2 ,
As discussed in the next section, the DC-bus voltage must regulate y0 , rather than VDC
and the AC component of VDC  2 is remarkably attenuated in the feedback loop. In other

words, the objective of the DC-bus voltage controller is to ensure that y0ss = VDCref
                                                                                   2    .
Hence, (12.98) can be rewritten as
                                 6
                                 7
                                 7              
                                                yss
                    VDC = VDCref 81 +           2
                                                           cos (2ω0 t + η).            (12.99)
                                               VDCref

It is plausible to assume that 
                               yss cos(2ω0 t + η)  VDCref
                                                     2     . Thus, (12.99) can be ap-
proximated as
                                   %                                      &
                                               
                                               yss
                  VDC ≈ VDCref 1 +             2
                                                         cos (2ω0 t + η)
                                             2VDCref
                           = VDCref + Vov cos (2ω0 t + η) ,                          (12.100)

where the overvoltage, Vov , is formulated as

        
        yss
Vov =
      2VDCref
      
        (a1 b2 )2 + (a2 b1 )2 − 2 (a1 b2 ) (a2 b1 ) cos [2 (θ01 − θ02 ) + (ψ1 − ψ2 )]
    =                                                                                 |Psref 1|.
                                   2a2 VDCref Ceq ω0
                                                                                      (12.101)


12.5.5   Generation of Low-Order Harmonics Under an Asymmetrical Fault
As discussed in Section 12.4.2, the effectiveness of the current-control scheme of
Figure 12.8 depends on faithful reproduction of the control signals Vtdref and Vtqref
by the VSC. The idea was to translate Vtdref and Vtqref into modulating signals md
and mq such that actual AC-side voltage components Vtd and Vtq are as close to Vtdref
and Vtqref as possible, despite dynamic ﬂuctuations of the DC-bus voltage. This goal
was pursued by dividing Vtdref and Vtqref by the dynamic value VDC (t)/2, to generate
366    BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


md and mq (see Fig. 12.8). It was also mentioned that if the DC-bus voltage is fairly
constant, Vtdref and Vtqref can be divided by the constant gain VDCref /2 to yield md
and mq . Hereinafter, we refer to the former strategy as the PWM with DC-bus voltage
feed-forward and to the latter as the PWM without DC-bus voltage feed-forward.
   One scenario in which the DC-bus voltage continuously ﬂuctuates is when the
HVDC system is subjected to an symmetrical fault, as detailed in Section 12.5.4. In
this section, we demonstrate that an asymmetrical fault at one of the AC sides of the
HVDC system results in the injection of low-order current harmonics into the other
(sound) AC system if the PWM without DC-bus voltage feed-forward is employed.
By contrast, the harmonics can be effectively mitigated by means of the PWM with
DC-bus voltage feed-forward.

12.5.5.1 PWM without DC-Bus Voltage Feed-Forward Consider the HVDC sys-
tem of Figure 12.3(a) (or Fig. 12.3(b)) whose, for example, PCC1 is subjected to an
asymmetrical fault while PCC2 is undisturbed. Based on (5.10)–(5.12), the PWM
modulating signals and the AC-side terminal voltages of the VSC are related as


                                           VDC
                                Vta2 (t) =     ma2 (t),
                                            2
                                           VDC
                                Vtb2 (t) =     mb2 (t),
                                            2
                                           VDC
                                Vtc2 (t) =     mc2 (t).
                                            2
                                                                             (12.102)


Since VSC2 operates under a balanced grid condition, Vtabc2 (t) must also constitute a
balanced three-phase waveform. Let Vtabc2ref (t) be the three-phase equivalent of the
control signals Vtd2ref and Vtq2ref (Fig. 12.8), such that


                                     t2 cos (ω0 t + δ2 ) ,
                       Vta2ref (t) = V
                                                              
                                                           2π
                       Vtb2ref (t) = Vt2 cos ω0 t + δ2 −         ,
                                                             3
                                                              
                                                           4π
                       Vtc2ref (t) = Vt2 cos ω0 t + δ2 −         ,
                                                             3
                                                                             (12.103)


where Vt2 and δ2 are the amplitude and the initial phase angle of Vtabc2ref (t), re-
spectively. Then, based on the PWM without DC-bus voltage feed-forward, that is, if
VDC is approximated by VDCref in the current-control scheme of Figure 12.8, mabc2
             HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                  367

assumes the form
                            #            $
                              t2 /VDCref cos (ω0 t + δ2 ) ,
                   ma2 (t) = 2V
                            #            $                    
                              t2 /VDCref cos ω0 t + δ2 − 2π ,
                   mb2 (t) = 2V
                                                             3
                            #            $                    
                              t2 /VDCref cos ω0 t + δ2 − 4π .
                   mc2 (t) = 2V                                             (12.104)
                                                             3

The VSC actual AC-side terminal voltage is then calculated based on (12.102), for
VDC and mabc2 described, respectively, by (12.100) and (12.104). Thus,
                                      0           1
                                   t2 Vov /VDCref cos (2ω0 t + η) cos (ω0 t + δ2 ) ,
            t2 cos (ω0 t + δ2 ) + V
 Vta2 (t) = V
                                     
                                  2π
 Vtb2 (t) = Vt2 cos ω0 t + δ2 −
                                    3
                                                                    
                  0              1
            +Vt2 Vov /VDCref cos (2ω0 t + η) cos ω0 t + δ2 − 2π ,
                                                                  3
                                     
            t2 cos ω0 t + δ2 − 4π
 Vtc2 (t) = V
                                    3
                                                                    
                  0              1
            +Vt2 Vov /VDCref cos (2ω0 t + η) cos ω0 t + δ2 − 4π ,           (12.105)
                                                                  3

or equivalently
                               0          1
                           t2 Vov /VDCref cos (2ω0 t + η) cos (ω0 t + δ2 ) ,
  Vta2 (t) = Vta2ref (t) + V
                                                                                
                               0          1
                           t2 Vov /VDCref cos (2ω0 t + η) cos ω0 t + δ2 − 2π ,
  Vtb2 (t) = Vtb2ref (t) + V
                                                                               3
                                                                                
                              0           1                                   4π
                           
  Vtc2 (t) = Vtc2ref (t) + Vt2 Vov /VDCref cos (2ω0 t + η) cos ω0 t + δ2 −         ,
                                                                            3
                                                                               
              desired
                                                unwanted
                                                                            (12.106)

where Vov , expressed by (12.101), is the amplitude of the DC-bus double-frequency
voltage oscillations due to the fault at PCC1.
   Equation (12.106) indicates that Vtabc2 is not an accurate reproduction of the
desired voltage Vtabc2ref , as it also includes
                                         -      an additional (unwanted)
                                                                 .       component.
Using the identity cos x cos y = (1/2) cos(x + y) + cos(x − y) , we deduce that the
unwanted component consists of a negative-sequence fundamental component and
a positive-sequence third-order harmonic. The negative-sequence component results
in an AC-side voltage imbalance, while the positive-sequence third-order harmonic
results in a third-order current harmonic. Based on (12.106), the amplitudes of
368     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


both the fundamental and third-order voltage harmonics are proportional to the
ratio Vov /VDCref that, as indicated by (12.101), can be limited to a small value by
selecting a large capacitance for Ceq . Low-order voltage/current harmonic generation
under unbalanced grid conditions is discussed in Ref. [100].

12.5.5.2 PWM with DC-Bus Voltage Feed-Forward The impact of the double-
frequency component of VDC on the VSC AC-side terminal voltage/current can be
effectively mitigated if the PWM with DC-bus voltage feed-forward is utilized, that
is, a measure of VDC (t) is used for the calculation of md and mq (see Fig. 12.8). Thus,
                                        
                             t2 /VDC (t) cos (ω0 t + δ2 ) ,
                  ma2 (t) = 2V
                                                            
                             t2 /VDC (t) cos ω0 t + δ2 − 2π ,
                  mb2 (t) = 2V
                                                             3
                                                            
                             t2 /VDC (t) cos ω0 t + δ2 − 4π .
                  mc2 (t) = 2V                                                 (12.107)
                                                             3

Substituting for mabc2 in (12.102), from (12.107), one obtains

                              t2 cos (ω0 t + δ2 ) = Vta2ref ,
                   Vta2 (t) = V
                                                       
                              t2 cos ω0 t + δ2 − 2π = Vtb2ref ,
                   Vtb2 (t) = V
                                                      3
                                                       
                                                    4π
                   Vtc2 (t) = Vt2 cos ω0 t + δ2 −          = Vtc2ref .         (12.108)
                                                      3

    Equation (12.108) indicates that Vtabc2 is an exact reproduction of the desired
voltage Vtabc2ref . This outcome is based on two prerequisites: (i) the measurement
bandwidth of VDC (t) is adequately larger than 2ω0 and (ii) the PWM switching fre-
quency (in rad/s) is adequately larger than 2ω0 . The ﬁrst requirement ensures that
ﬂuctuations of VDC (t) are communicated to mabc2 (t) with insigniﬁcant attenuation or
phase delay. The second requirement is to ensure that mabc2 (t) is faithfully tracked
and reproduced by the VSC, with low distortions. In practice, the two foregoing con-
ditions, especially the second one, are not fully satisﬁed, and therefore, the impact of
an symmetrical fault at one PCC on the other PCC cannot be entirely eliminated.
    Comparing (12.103) with (12.107), we derive

                                              2
                               ma2 (t) =             Vta2ref ,                 (12.109)
                                           VDC (t)
                                              2
                               mb2 (t) =             Vtb2ref ,                 (12.110)
                                           VDC (t)
                                             2
                               mc2 (t) =           Vtc2ref .                   (12.111)
                                           VDC (t)
             HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                      369

Multiplying both sides of (12.109)–(12.111) by (2/3)ej0 , (2/3)ej2π/3 , and
(2/3)ej4π/3 , respectively, and adding both sides of the resultant equations, based
on (4.2) we deduce

                              −
                              →              2      →
                                                    −
                              m 2 (t) =             V t2ref (t).                  (12.112)
                                          VDC (t)

Multiplying both sides of (12.112) by e−jρ and expressing each space phasor in terms
                                                 →
                                                 −
of its d- and q-axis components based on fdq = f e−jρ , we obtain
                                             2
                              md2 (t) =             Vtd2ref (t),                  (12.113)
                                          VDC (t)
                                            2
                              mq2 (t) =           Vtq2ref (t),                    (12.114)
                                          VDC (t)

which represent the dq-frame realization of the DC-bus voltage feed-forward. This
realization is illustrated in the block diagram of Figure 12.8.


12.5.6   Steady-State Power-Flow Under an Asymmetrical Fault
For a sound HVDC system, the power components that are exchanged with the PCCs
are DC quantities. However, if one of the two PCCs is subjected to an asymmetrical
fault, the real power (and also the reactive power) exchanged at that PCC includes a
pulsating ripple in addition to the DC component (equation (12.76)). While the DC
power component of the faulted PCC is equalized by the real power that is exchanged
with the other (sound) PCC, the pulsating power component causes DC-bus voltage
ﬂuctuations, (12.100). In this section, we formulate the steady-state real power at
the two PCCs, in terms of the real-power command, when either or both PCCs are
subjected to an asymmetrical fault.
   Based on (12.76), the actual real power at the PCCs is

               Ps1−act = a1 Ps1ss + b1 Ps1ss cos [2ω01 t + (2θ01 + ψ1 )] ,        (12.115)
               Ps2−act = a2 Ps2ss + b2 Ps2ss cos [2ω02 t + (2θ02 + ψ2 )] .        (12.116)

In a steady state, Ps1ss = Psref 1 and Ps2ss = −(a1 /a2 )Psref 1 based on (12.96). There-
fore, (12.115) and (12.116) can be rewritten as

     Ps1−act = a1 Psref 1 + b1 Psref 1 cos [2ω01 t + (2θ01 + ψ1 )] ,              (12.117)
                               
                                a1
     Ps2−act = −a1 Psref 1 −           b2 Psref 1 cos [2ω02 t + (2θ02 + ψ2 )] .   (12.118)
                                a2

Equations (12.117) and (12.118) indicate that the DC power components of the two
PCCs are equal, no matter if the PCCs are sound or faulted. This implies that the
DC-bus voltage has a constant average value in the steady state. However, under
370       BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


an asymmetrical fault condition when b =    / 0, the real power exchanged between the
HVDC system and the faulted PCC also includes a sinusoidal ripple component.
Equations (12.117) and (12.118) show that the amplitude of the ripple component is
proportional to the real-power set point, Psref 1 .
    Equations (12.117) and (12.118) also show that if an asymmetrical fault occurs at
PCC1, that is, at the PCC corresponding to the real-/reactive-power controller half of
the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(b), then a1 < 1 and the absolute value of the DC
power component of each PCC is reduced from |Psref 1 | to a1 |Psref 1 |. Then, while
the amplitude of the VSC1 line current does not change, the amplitude of the VSC2
line current reduces to a1 times its pre-fault value. However, if the fault takes place at
PCC2, that is, at the PCC corresponding to the controlled DC-voltage power port half
of the HVDC system, the amplitude of the VSC1 line current remains unchanged,
whereas the amplitude of the VSC2 line current increases to 1/a2 times its prefault
value. The reason is that, in this case, the DC component of the power remains the
same as |Psref 1 |. Let us assume that the amplitude of the VSC2 (and VSC1) AC-side
current is limited to its rated value.7 Then, the maximum DC power component that
VSC2 can transfer from PCC2 to the DC bus and vice versa is a2 Prated , where Prated
is the power rating of VSC1 and VSC2. Consequently, if |Psref 1 | > a2 Prated , the
balance of power is lost and the DC-bus voltage drifts. The solution to this problem
is to introduce an external protective control loop that limits |Psref 1 | under such a
condition.

   EXAMPLE 12.2                DC-Bus Overvoltage Under a Line-to-Ground Fault
   Consider a back-to-back HVDC system with the equivalent system of Figure
   12.3(b), with Ceq = 500 ␮F, ω01 = ω02 = 377 rad/s, and VDCref = 35 kV, and
   also assume that the power-ﬂow set point is Psref 1 = 24 MW while Qsref 1 =
   Qsref 2 = 0. We wish to calculate the steady-state DC-bus overvoltage, as well
   as the actual real power that is exchanged with each PCC, when one of the
   PCCs is subjected to a line-to-ground fault.
      If a line-to-ground fault occurs at PCC1, we have (a1 , b1 ) = (2/3, 1/3),
   (a2 , b2 ) = (1, 0), and ψ1 = 0. Then, based on (12.100) and (12.101), we obtain

                           Vov ≈ 0.606 [kV],
                           VDC ≈ 35 + 0.606 cos (754t + η)                 [kV],                 (12.119)

   which corresponds to about 1.7% overvoltage. It then follows from (12.117)
   and (12.118) that

                          Ps1−act = 16 + 8 cos (754t + 2θ01 ) [MW],
                          Ps2−act = −16          [MW].                                           (12.120)

7 In practice, the saturation limit on the current amplitude is picked 10–20% higher than the rated value, to

allow both dynamic excursions and temporary overloads.
             HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                     371

   Equation (12.120) indicates that compared to a sound operating condition, a
   lower amount of (average) real power, that is, 16 MW, ﬂows from Grid2 to
   Grid1. The reason is that the positive-sequence voltage of PCC1 has dropped
                                                                            s ) has
   to 2/3 of its prefault value (see Example 12.1), while id1 = 2Psref 1 /(3V
   not been changed.
      However, if the line-to-ground fault takes place at PCC2, then (a1 , b1 ) =
   (1, 0), (a2 , b2 ) = (2/3, 1/3), and ψ2 = 0; thus,

                      Vov ≈ 0.909 [kV],
                      VDC ≈ 35 + 0.909 cos (754t + η)         [kV],            (12.121)

   which corresponds to about 2.6% overvoltage. Furthermore,

                   Ps1−act = 24 [MW],
                   Ps2−act = −24 − 12 cos (754t + 2θ02 )        [MW].          (12.122)

   In this case, as (12.122) shows, the (average) power ﬂow from Grid2 to Grid1
   remains the same as Psref 1 = 24 MW since PCC1 is sound. This, however, is
   at the expense of 1.5 times increase in id2 compared to a sound condition. The
   reason is that, due to the fault at PCC2, the positive-sequence voltage of PCC2
   becomes 2/3 of the prefault value, while based on the principle of power balance
   the (average) real power exchanged with PCC2 is dictated to be Psref 1 = 24
   MW.


12.5.7   DC-Bus Voltage Control Under an Asymmetrical Fault
Thus far, we have discussed that VDC2 is a DC quantity under balanced grid conditions.

However, it includes a sinusoidal component with the frequency 2ω0 , in addition to its
DC (average) component y0 , when one or both PCCs are subjected to an asymmetrical
fault. In this section, we demonstrate that the DC-bus voltage controller of Figure
12.6 should regulate y0 rather than VDC2 , to prevent generation of voltage and current

harmonics at the sound grid. This can be achieved if the DC-bus voltage compensator
Kv (s) (Fig. 12.6) exhibits a large gain drop at frequency 2ω0 . If this condition is not
satisﬁed, under asymmetrical faults the HVDC AC current waveforms experience
low-order harmonic distortions and imbalance.

12.5.7.1 Steady-State Analysis Consider the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(a) for
which frequencies of both grids are equal to ω0 . The DC-bus voltage is controlled
through the control scheme shown at the bottom of Figure 12.6. Assume that PCC1 is
subjected to an asymmetrical fault, and the system is under a steady-state condition.
                              2 is expressed as
Therefore, based on (12.91), VDC

                            2
                           VDC = y0ss + 
                                        yss cos (2ω0 t + η) .                  (12.123)
372      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


Consequently, the error signal ev = VDCref
                                     2     − VDC
                                              2 , the output of K (s), and the real-
                                                                 v
power command Psref 2 also include sinusoidal and DC components. Psref 2 can be
expressed as
                         #              $
      Psref 2 = |Kv (j0)| y0ss − VDCref
                                  2
                                          + |Kv (j2ω0 )|
                                                        yss cos (2ω0 t + ϑ) , (12.124)

where

                                         ϑ = η + ∠Kv (j2ω0 ).                       (12.125)

As Figure 12.9 illustrates, the d-axis current reference idref 2 is calculated from Psref 2 ,
as
                       #             $  2 
           2
idref 2 =       |Kv (j0)| y0ss − VDCref +
                                  2
                                                           yss cos (2ω0 t + ϑ) .
                                               |Kv (j2ω0 )|
           s
          3V                               s
                                          3V
                                                                                    (12.126)

Based on (12.28) and (12.125), the response of id2 to idref 2 is

                                 id2ss = A0 + A1 cos (2ω0 t + ) ,                  (12.127)

where
                                                            #              $
                                  2
                   A0 =                    |Kv (j0)| |Gi (0j)| y0ss − VDCref
                                                                       2
                                  s
                                 3V                     
                                                           =1
                                                #          $
                            2
                   =                 |Kv (j0)| y0ss − VDCref
                                                       2
                                                               ,                    (12.128)
                            s
                           3V



                                                 2
                       A1 =                                    |Kv (j2ω0 )|
                                                                            yss ,   (12.129)
                                    s
                                   3V          1 + (2τi ω0 )2
                        = ϑ − tan−1 (2τi ω0 ) .                                    (12.130)

The space phasor corresponding to iabc2 is
                                     ⎛                     ⎞
                           −→ ⎜                ⎟
                           i2ss = ⎝id2 + j iq2 ⎠ ejρ2
                                           
                                                      =0
                            -                       .
                           = A0 + A1 cos (2ω0 t + ) ej(ω0 t+θ02 ) .                (12.131)
              HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                      373

                                   0          1
Based on the identity cos θ = (1/2) ejθ + e−jθ , we can rewrite (12.131) as

          −→                        A1 −j(ω0 t−θ02 +) A1 j(3ω0 t+θ02 +)
          i2ss = A0 ej(ω0 t+θ02 ) +   e                +   e              .      (12.132)
                                    2                 2            
                                              imbalance         third harmonic


                                    −→
Equation (12.132) indicates that i2ss and thus iabc2 includes a negative-sequence
fundamental component and a third-order harmonic component, in addition to the
positive-sequence component. The negative-sequence component causes iabc2 to be
unbalanced, and the third-order harmonic results in distortion.
   Equation (12.132) shows that the amplitudes of both the negative-sequence and the
third-order harmonic components are proportional to A1 . Thus, one must make A1
as small as possible to mitigate imbalance and harmonic distortion of iabc2 . Based on
(12.97) and (12.129), one can select larger DC-bus capacitors, that is, larger Ceq , to
limit 
      yss and thus A1 . However, due to the cost, weight, and footprint, Ceq is practically
limited.
   An elegant and potentially less expensive method for limiting A1 is to design
Kv (s) such that it exhibits a considerable gain attenuation at frequency 2ω0 , that is,
|Kv (j2ω0 )|  1. This is possible, for example, by including one pair of complex-
conjugate zeros at s = ±2jω0 in Kv (s). In case where the frequencies of the two
grids are not equal, two pairs of complex-conjugate poles may be located, one
at s = ±2jω01 and the other at s = ±2jω02 ; alternatively, one pair of complex-
                                                  √
conjugate zeros may be located at s = ±2j ω01 ω02 if ω01 and ω02 are fairly
close.
   As discussed earlier in this chapter, under a balanced condition VDC    2 (= y ) is a
                                                                                    0
pure DC quantity in steady state. However, if the HVDC system is subjected to an
asymmetrical fault, y0 constitutes only the DC component (average value) of VDC        2 .

Note that if the sinusoidal component of VDC2 is signiﬁcantly attenuated in the feedback

signal—to avoid imbalance and distortion of the AC-side current—then y0 will be
the only component of VDC   2 that can be controlled. Substituting in (12.127) for A
                                                                                          0
from (12.128) and assuming that A1 = 0 , we have
                                                     #              $
                                     2
                      id2ss =                 |Kv (j0)| y0ss − VDCref
                                                                2
                                                                        .        (12.133)
                                     s
                                    3V

Since id2ss is a limited nonzero variable, (y0ss − VDCref
                                                    2     ) −→ 0 if |Kv (j0)| −→ ∞.
This implies that y0 can be regulated at VDCref with zero steady-state error, if Kv (s)
exhibits an inﬁnite DC gain, for example, through a pole at s = 0.
   Based on the foregoing steady-state analysis, we conclude that the DC-bus voltage
compensator, Kv (s), must include one pair of complex-conjugate zeros at s = ±j2ω0 ,
and one pole at s = 0. Other poles and/or zeros of Kv (s) must be identiﬁed through
a design procedure, based on the dynamic model of the plant as presented in Section
12.5.7.2.
374     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


12.5.7.2 Dynamic Analysis In the HVDC system of Figure 12.3(a), the DC-bus
           2 , is regulated by the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 12.6,
voltage, VDC
through Ps2 . As discussed in Section 12.5.7.1, the DC-bus voltage controller must
regulate the DC component of VDC    2 , that is, y , rather than V 2 itself. Otherwise,
                                                  0                DC
under unbalanced grid conditions, for example, due to asymmetrical faults, low-order
harmonics and imbalance are introduced in the corresponding AC-side current.
   Dynamics of y0 are described by (12.86). In (12.86), y0 is the output, Ps1 is the
disturbance input, and Ps2 is the control input, where Ps1 and Ps2 are responses of
d-axis current controllers of VSC1 and VSC2 to reference signals Psref 1 and Psref 2 ,
                                                                        2
respectively. The objective of the control system is to regulate y0 at VDCref . A model
of the plant suitable for the control design is deduced by linearizing (12.86) about a
steady-state operating point. Thus,
                                   %                              &
                   d y0          2                  2LPs2ss d Ps2
                        =−              a2 Ps2 +                      ,         (12.134)
                    dt          Ceq                   3Vs2      dt

where superscript ∼ and index ss, respectively, represent small-signal perturbations
and steady-state values of the variables. Substituting for Ps2ss from (12.96) in (12.134),
we deduce
                                  %                                   &
                 d y0           2                 2a1 LPsref 1 d Ps2
                      =−              a2 Ps2 −                            ,       (12.135)
                  dt          Ceq                        s2
                                                     3a2 V          dt

where the a1 and a2 are unity when PCC1 and PCC2 are sound, and are less than unity
when PCCs are subjected to asymmetrical faults (see Example 12.1). The Laplace
transform of (12.135) provides the transfer function Gv (s) = y0 /Ps2 as
                                                    
                                 y0 (s)            2   τs + 1
                       Gv (s) =         = −a2                 ,            (12.136)
                                Ps2 (s)          Ceq       s

where the time constant τ is
                                              
                                         a1        2LPsref 1
                               τ=−                             .                (12.137)
                                         a22          s2
                                                     3V

   Equations (12.136) and (12.137) constitute a linearized model for controlling (the
DC component of) the DC-bus voltage of a back-to-back HVDC system subjected
to an unbalanced grid condition. It should be noted that (12.43) and (12.48), which
describe the plant dynamics for a balanced grid condition, are the special cases of
(12.136) and (12.137) where a1 and a2 are both are equal to 1.
   Figure 12.15 illustrates a control block diagram of the DC-bus voltage control loop
based on the model of the plant for an unbalanced grid condition, that is, (12.136) and
(12.137). The control block diagram of Figure 12.15 is structurally the same as its
counterpart under a balanced grid condition of Figure 12.12. In both control systems
of Figures 12.15 and 12.12, Ps2 is the plant input. However, under a balanced grid
                                                      2 , whereas under an unbalanced
condition, Ps2 controls the DC-bus voltage, that is, VDC
                 HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                          375

       DC-bus voltage controller                    Composite control plant
                                          Power controller      DC-bus voltage dynamics
           e˜V Compensator          P˜ sref 2
                                            dynamics
                                                         P˜ s2                       τs + 1
                                                                 GV (s) = − a2 ( 2 )
           − − V
 0               K (s)                          Gi (s)                                        y˜ 0
                                                                                 Ceq s


FIGURE 12.15 Control block diagram of the DC-bus voltage regulator for a back-to-back
HVDC system subjected to an asymmetrical fault.


grid condition, Ps2 controls merely the DC component of the DC-bus voltage, that is,
y0 . Note that y0 is not directly measurable but is embedded in VDC   2 . As discussed in
                                                                    2
Section 12.5.7.1, the double-frequency ripple component of VDC , if penetrated into
Psref 2 and Ps2 , results in imbalance and harmonic distortion of the corresponding
AC-side current. Therefore, Kv (s) must exhibit a low gain at 2ω0 , to attenuate the
ripple component of VDC  2 and recover y . This can be achieved by including one pair
                                           0
of complex-conjugate zeros at s = ±jω0 , in Kv (s). Moreover, to regulate y0 at VDCref
                                                                                    2

with zero steady-state error, Kv (s) must also include at least one pole at s = 0. Other
poles and/or zeros of Kv (s) must be located through a design procedure, accounting
for the desired closed-loop bandwidth, stability margins, and so on, and based on the
dynamic model of the plant described by (12.136) and (12.137).
    Based on (12.137), if Psref 1 is positive, then τ, the time constant corresponding to
the zero of Gv (s), is negative and Gv (s) represents a non-minimum-phase plant. If
τ is negative, ∠Gv (jω) decreases as the frequency increases. This, in turn, indicates
that the control-loop phase margin is reduced when Psref 1 is set to a positive value
and (real) power ﬂows from Grid2 to Grid1. Based on (12.137), a larger Psref 1 results
in a larger absolute value of τ and thus a lower phase margin. Equation (12.137) also
indicates that when Psref 1 is positive, the largest reduction of ∠Gv (jω) corresponds
to the case where PCC2 is subjected to an asymmetrical fault while PCC1 is sound,
that is, when a2 < 1 and a1 = 1. The destabilizing effect of this phase reduction is,
however, outweighed by the drop in the loop gain magnitude due to the factor a2 (see
(12.136) and Fig. 12.15). For example, if PCC2 is subjected to a line-to-ground fault
while PCC1 is sound, that is, a2 = 2/3 and a1 = 1, then τ increases to 2.25 times its
prefault value, whereas the loop gain reduces to 66% of its prefault magnitude. To
design Kv (s), in addition to the normal rated operating points, the operating points
corresponding to possible types of asymmetrical fault must also be considered. The
guidelines for compensator design are provided in Examples 7.4, 8.1, and 8.4, and
are not repeated in this chapter. The next example demonstrates the performance of
the back-to-back HVDC system, under normal and faulted grid conditions.

     EXAMPLE 12.3                  Performance of Back-to-Back HVDC System
     Consider the HVDC system of Figure 12.1 for which both AC sides are identical.
     The rating of the HVDC system is 36 MVA, that is, either a maximum of
     36 MW real power can be transferred from one grid to the other one if both
     sides operate at unity power factor, or each side of the HVDC system can
     independently exchange a maximum of ± 36 MVAr with the corresponding
376      BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


           TABLE 12.1       HVDC System Parameters; Example 12.3

           Parameter                                       Value               Comment
                                                                           
           HVDC system power rating                      36 MVA              Ps2 + Q2s < 36
                                                                                  
           Grid voltage                              138 kV (l-l rms)            Vgabc
           Grid inductance                               0.2 mH                   Li
           Grid frequency                                 60 Hz             ω0 = 377 rad/s
           Transformer rating                            36 MVA
           Transformer voltage ratio                   138/17.9 kV             Delta/Y
           Transformer leakage inductance
              referred to high-voltage side              112 mH                    Ll
           Interface reactor inductance                  8.5 mH8                   L
           Interface reactor resistance                   75 m                    R
           Capacitance of DC-side capacitors             500 ␮F                C1 and C2
           Switch cell on-state resistance               6.5 m
           Switch cell on-state voltage drop              11.5 V
           Equivalent DC-bus capacitance                 500 ␮F                   Ceq
           DC-bus voltage                                 35 kV                  VDCref


   grid when no real power is exchanged. The exchange of a reactive power of
   |Qs | < 36 MVAr
                will reduce the real-power rating of the HVDC system, based
   on Pmax = 362 − Q2s .
       Figure 12.1 shows that each VSC of the HVDC system is a three-level NPC
   with a capacitive voltage divider (Fig. 12.4). The third-harmonic injected PWM
   strategy is adopted for the three-level NPCs. Switching frequencies of both
   three-level NPCs are 1680 Hz. However, PWM carrier waveforms of the two
   converters are synchronized neither to the corresponding grids nor to each other.
   For each three-level NPCs, the voltages of the DC-side capacitors are equal-
   ized by means of a corresponding partial DC-side voltage equalizing scheme
   (Fig. 12.11). The total DC-bus voltage of the HVDC system is regulated at
   VDCref = 35 kV. The on-state resistance and voltage drop of each switch cell
   are about 6.5 m and 11.5 V, respectively.9 Thus, the effective internal re-
   sistance of each VSC is approximately ron = 2 × 6.5 = 13 m. Table 12.1
   provides the parameters of the HVDC system.
      As Figure 12.1 illustrates, two harmonic ﬁlters—one in parallel with PCC1
   and the other in parallel with PCC2—are provided for the HVDC system.
   The function of each harmonic ﬁlter is to mitigate the harmonic distortion
   of the corresponding PCC voltage. Each harmonic ﬁlter is composed of two
   series-resonant RLC circuits as shown in Figure 12.16: one resonant circuit
   exhibits a low impedance at the 27th-order harmonic and the other resonant
   circuit exhibits a low impedance at the 29th-order harmonic. For both resonant
   circuits, Lf 1 = Lf 2 = 1.93 mH, rf 1 = rf 2 = 25 m, and Rf 1 = Rf 2 = 25 .

8 Depending on the design speciﬁcs and/or operational requirements, this reactance can assume a smaller

value or even be replaced by a more elaborate ﬁlter conﬁguration.
9 These data are estimated based on the assumption that each switch cell is composed of nine series-

connected 2500 V/2000 A IGBTs, 5SNR-20H2500, from ABB.
          HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT                            377


                                               a           b              c




                                    Lf1                                           Lf 2
                              Rf1                                        Rf 2
                                    rf1                                           rf 2

                                  Cf1                                         Cf 2

      resonant section #1                      resonant section #2
     FIGURE 12.16 Schematic diagram of harmonic ﬁlters of Example 12.3.

However, Cf 1 = 5.0 ␮F for the circuit tuned to the 27th-order harmonic,
whereas Cf 2 = 4.3 ␮F for the other resonant circuit.
   Assuming that a closed-loop time constant of τi = 1.0 ms is desired for
current control, based on (12.25)–(12.27), the compensators of dq-frame current
controllers (Fig. 12.8) are
                                           8.5s + 88
                       kd (s) = kq (s) =                 [].                      (12.138)
                                               s

The transfer function of the feed-forward ﬁlters is Gff (s) = 1/(8×10−6 s+1).
Transfer functions of the compensator and ﬁlter of the DC-side voltage equal-
izing scheme (Fig. 12.11) are

           K(s) = 0.05 [(kV)−1 ],
                     s2 + (3ω0 )2       s2 + 11312
           F (s) =                =                    .
                      (s + 3ω0 )2   s2 + 2262s + 11312

(See Section 7.4 and Fig. 7.16 for analysis, and Example 7.3 for design guide-
lines.) Transfer function of the PLL compensator (Fig. 12.7) is
                  0         10                1
            18,340 s2 + 7542 s2 + 166s + 6889
   H(s) = 0 2               10                  1                     [(rad/s)/(kV)].
         s s + 1508s + 7542 s2 + 964s + 232,324

(See Section 8.3.5 and Example 8.1 for design guidelines.). The compensator
of the DC-bus voltage controller has the transfer function
                                                               
                                  s2 + 7542            s + 50.9
         Kv (s) = 0.022                                                 [−1 ].
                              s2 + 75.4s + 7542           s
378                  BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


           Note that both H(s) and Kv (s) include integral terms and zeros at ±754j rad/s.
           Figure 12.17 illustrates response of the HVDC system to the start-up process,
           a ramp change in the power-ﬂow command, and the reversal of the power-ﬂow
           direction.
               Initially, the HVDC system is disconnected from both grids and the DC
           capacitors are discharged, the gating pulses of the two VSCs are blocked, all
           controllers are inactive, and Psref 1 , Qsref 1 , and Qsref 2 are all set to zero. At
           t = 0 s, the transformers are connected to the corresponding grids through 1200
            preinsertion resistors (not shown in Fig. 12.1). Consequently, the DC-side
           capacitors of the VSCs are smoothly charged and the DC-bus voltage, VDC ,
           reaches about 25 kV (Fig. 12.17(d)). At t = 0.15 s, the preinsertion resistors
           are bypassed and TR1 and TR2 are directly connected to the grids. At t = 0.2 s,
           while the power-ﬂow command Psref 1 is kept at zero (Fig. 12.17(a)), the gating
           signals are unblocked, the controllers are activated, and the DC-bus voltage
           reference is ramped up to 35 kV. Thus, VDC tracks VDCref and settles at 35 kV,
           at about t = 0.35 s. Figure 12.17(b) shows that during the start-up, the real power
           exchanged with PCC1 remains at zero since Psref 1 = 0. However, to increase
           VDC from 25 to 35 kV, power must be delivered to the DC-bus capacitors.
           Consequently, as Figure 12.17(c) illustrates, Ps2-act becomes slightly negative
           to facilitate the ﬂow of power from Grid2 to the capacitors.


                         (a)
 Psref 1 (MW)




                   24
                    0
                −36


                         (b)
 Ps1-act (MW)




                   24
                    0
                −36


                   36 (c)
 Ps2-act (MW)




                  0
                −24



                   35 (d)
        VDC (kV)




                   25
                                                                                         VDCref
                                                                                         VDC
                    0
                     0         0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4      0.5     0.6   0.7    0.8     0.9         1
                                                       time (s)
FIGURE 12.17 Response of the HVDC system of Figure 12.1 to start-up and changes in the
power-ﬂow command.
                                  HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT             379

              At t = 0.6 s, Psref 1 is ramped down from zero to −36 MW, corresponding
          to a 36 MW real-power transfer from Grid1 to Grid2 (Fig. 12.17(a)). Likewise,
          Ps1-act follows Psref 1 from zero to −36 MW (Fig. 12.17(b)) and Ps2-act in-
          creases from zero to slightly less than 36 MW (Fig. 12.17(c)); the discrepancy
          is due to the power losses of the VSCs. Figure 12.17(d) illustrates that due to
          the intervention of the power feed-forward signal, that is, Pexteq in the lower
          part of Figure 12.6, the deviation of VDC from 35 kV is insigniﬁcant. If Psref 1
          is changed stepwise rather than slowly, a large DC-bus voltage is required to
          prevent the VSCs from entering into the overmodulation mode of operation
          (see Sections 7.3.4 and 7.3.5 for analysis).
              Figure 12.17 also illustrates the response of the HVDC system to a reversal
          in the power-ﬂow direction. As Figure 12.17(a) and (b) illustrates, at t = 0.8 s
          Psref 1 is ramped up from −36 MW to 24 MW and is tracked by Ps1-act . Thus,
          Ps2-act changes from about 36 MW to −24 MW, as Figure 12.17(c) shows.
          Figure 12.17(d) shows that the DC-bus voltage responds to the power-ﬂow
          reversal with a relatively small deviation from VDCref .
              Figure 12.18 provides a close-up of the response of the HVDC system to the
          power-ﬂow reversal. Figure 12.18(a) shows that Psref 1 is changed from −36 to
          24 MW with a rate of 3.6 MW/ms. Figure 12.18(a) also shows that Ps1-act tracks
          Psref 1 with zero steady-state error. However, since Ps1-act (s)/Psref 1 (s) = Gi (s)
          is a ﬁrst-order transfer function, Ps1-act is slightly smaller than Psref 1 during the


                                (a)
      Ps1-act (MW)




                         24
                          0                                                           Psref1
                        −36                                                           Ps1-act


                         10
                                (b)
      Qs1-act (M VAr)




                          5
                          0                                                           Qsref1
                         −5                                                           Q s1-act
                        −10

                    15          (c)
 ia1 and Vsa1




                    8.5
                      0                                                             5ia1 (kA)
                   −8.5                                                             Vsa1 (kV)
                   −15

                         36     (d)
             VDC (kV)




                         35
                                                                                         VDCref
                         33                                                              VDC
                         0.77         0.79   0.81    0.83       0.85   0.87       0.89           0.91
                                                         time (s)

FIGURE 12.18 Response of the HVDC system of Figure 12.1 to a power-ﬂow reversal at
t = 0.8 s.
380                        BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


         period in which Psref 1 is ramped up. Figure 12.18(b) illustrates that despite the
         change in Ps1-act , Qs1-act remains fairly regulated at its set point of Qsref 1 = 0.
         This is due to the decoupling mechanism employed in the dq-frame current-
         control scheme of Figure 12.8. Figure 12.18(c) illustrates the waveforms of ia1
         and Vsa1 . Figure 12.18(c) indicates that (i) until t = 0.8 s, isa1 and Vsa1 are 180◦
         phase shifted, since Ps1-act is negative, (ii) between t = 0.8 and 0.81 s, Ps1-act
         reduces in absolute value, so does the amplitude of ia1 , and (iii) after t = 0.81
         s, Ps1-act becomes positive and increases; hence, ia1 and Vsa1 become cophasal,
         and the amplitude of ia1 increases. Figure 12.18(d) shows that VDC exhibits an
         overshoot of about 2.7%, followed by an undershoot of about −5% due to the
         power-ﬂow reversal.
             It should be noted that Ps is a mathematical quantity deﬁned by (12.30)
         and is equivalent to Ps-act , that is, the actual real power that is exchanged with
         the grid, only under a balanced grid condition. However, under unbalanced grid
         conditions, as indicated by (12.76), Ps constitutes a fraction of the DC (average)
         component of Ps-act .
             Figure 12.19 illustrates the response of the HVDC system to line-to-ground
         faults. At t = 1.05 s, phase c of PCC1 is subjected to a line-to-ground fault
         while PCC2 is sound. Consequently, Ps1-act converts from a constant 24-MW
         waveform to a composite waveform that consists of a 16-MW DC component
         and a double-power-frequency sinusoidal ripple with an amplitude of about 8
           Ps1-act (MW)




                          24
                          16

                           0 (a)



                           0
 Ps2-act (MW)




                  −16
                  −24

                               (b)




                40.5
  VDC (kV)




                          35

                          28   (c)
                           1         1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4     1.5      1.6   1.7   1.8   1.9    2
                                                             time (s)
FIGURE 12.19 Response of the HVDC system of Figure 12.1 to line-to-ground faults at
PCC1 and PCC2.
                                HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT        381

         MW (Fig. 12.19(a)). Thus, to keep the average of the DC-bus voltage regulated,
         the DC-bus voltage controller changes Ps2-act from −24 MW to −16 MW, as
         Figure 12.19(b) shows, to balance the DC component of Ps1-act . Figure 12.19(c)
         illustrates that during the fault the DC-bus voltage assumes a sinusoidal com-
         ponent; moreover, VDC undergoes an overshoot of about 14% following the
         fault inception. The overshoot, however, decays to zero in about 100 ms and
         the average value of VDC is settled at 35 kV. The fault is cleared at t = 1.35 s.
         Thereafter, Ps1-act , Ps2-act , and VDC resume their respective pre-fault forms, as
         Figure 12.19 illustrates.
             At t = 1.55 s, phase c of PCC2 is subjected to a line-to-ground fault, but PCC1
         remains sound; the fault is cleared at t = 1.85 s. During the fault Ps1-act remains
         constant at 24 MW (Fig. 12.19(a)), whereas Ps2-act assumes a sinusoidal ripple
         component with an amplitude of 12 MW, in addition to a DC component of
         about −24 MW (equal to Ps1-act ) (Fig. 12.19(b)). Figure 12.19(c) shows that
         VDC includes a sinusoidal ripple component superimposed on an average value
         of about 35 kV and is disturbed at the instants of fault inception and clearance.
         Figure 12.19(c) also shows that the overshoot of VDC is about 20% and damped
         in less than 100 ms.
             Figure 12.20 illustrates the VSC line current waveforms and the PCC volt-
         ages for the time period over which PCC1 is subjected to the line-to-ground


                    15
 Vsabc1 (kV)




                     0
               −15
                         (a)


                     1
      isabc1 (kA)




                     0
                    −1
                         (b)


                    15
 Vsabc2 (kV)




                     0
               −15
                         (c)


                     1
      isabc2 (kA)




                     0
                    −1
                         (d)
                               1.05    1.1    1.15    1.2        1.25   1.3    1.35       1.4
                                                      time (s)
FIGURE 12.20 Line current and PCC voltage waveforms of the HVDC system of Figure 12.1
when the fault occurs at PCC1.
382                     BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


         fault. As Figure 12.20(a) shows, during the fault Vsabc1 is unbalanced. However,
         due to feed-forward of Vsd1 and Vsq1 (see Fig. 12.8), iabc1 remains balanced
         (Fig. 12.20(b)). Moreover, since Psref 1 is not
                                                       /changed during the faults period,
         id1 remains constant. Therefore, since i1 = i2 + i2 and iq1 = 0, the ampli-
                                                                 d1      q1
         tude of iabc1 does not change with respect to the prefault condition, as Figure
         12.20(b) illustrates. Figure 12.20(c) and (d) shows that Vsabc2 and iabc2 are
         balanced since PCC2 is sound. However, to maintain the balance of (average)
         real power, the DC-bus voltage controller reduces the absolute value of Ps2-act
         from 24 to 16 MW (see Fig. 12.19(b)), through the reduction of the amplitude
         of iabc2 (Fig. 12.20(d)).
            Figure 12.21 illustrates the same variables shown in Figure 12.21, but for
         the case where PCC2 is subjected to the line-to-ground fault. In this case,
         Vsabc1 and iabc remain unchanged with respect to the prefault condition, whereas
         Vsabc2 is unbalanced. However, in contrast to the case of the fault at PCC1, the
         amplitude of iabc2 increases following the fault inception (Fig. 12.21(d)). The
         reason is that during the fault at PCC2, the DC component of Ps2-act remains
         equal to the prefault value of Ps2-act as shown in Figure 12.19(b). However,
         the amplitude of the positive-sequence component of Vsabc2 drops due to the
         imbalance. Consequently, to transfer the same average power as the prefault
         condition, iabc2 is increased proportionally by the DC-bus voltage controller.


                       15
   Vsabc1 (kV)




                        0
                 −15
                            (a)


                        1
         isabc1 (kA)




                        0
                       −1
                            (b)


                       15
   Vsabc2 (kV)




                        0
                 −15
                            (c)


                   1.5
 isabc2 (kA)




                        0
               −1.5 (d)
                                  1.55   1.6   1.65   1.7         1.75        1.8   1.85   1.9
                                                      time (s)
FIGURE 12.21 Line current and PCC voltage waveforms of the HVDC system of Figure 12.1
when the fault occurs at PCC2.
                                    HVDC SYSTEM PERFORMANCE UNDER AN ASYMMETRICAL FAULT       383


                                           Vsd1
            Vsdq1 (kV)
                         15
                         10
                                           Vsq1
                          0
                              (a)


                 0.75
maug-abc1




                          0
            −0.75 (b)


                                                                                      Vsd2
            Vsdq2 (kV)




                         15
                                                                                      Vsq2
                          0
                              (c)


                 0.75
maug-abc2




                          0
            −0.75 (d)
                                            1.05                      1.1                    1.15
                                                           time (s)

FIGURE 12.22 d- and q-axis components of PCC voltages, and PWM modulating signals
of the HVDC system of Figure 12.1 when PCC1 is faulted.


            Figure 12.22 illustrates the waveforms of d- and q-axis components of PCC
        voltages, and the PWM modulating signals of the two VSCs, when PCC1 is
        subjected to the line-to-ground fault. Figure 12.22(a) shows that subsequent
        to the fault, Vsd1 and Vsq1 assume double-frequency sinusoidal components.
        Moreover, while the the DC component of Vsq1 is regulated by the correspond-
        ing PLL at zero, the DC component of Vsd1 drops by 33%. Prior to the fault,
        the modulating signals of VSC1 constitute a balanced set of waveforms with
        an injected third-order harmonic (Fig. 12.22(b)). However, following the fault
        at t = 1.05 s, since Vsd1 and Vsq1 are incorporated as feed-forward signals (see
        Fig. 12.8), maug-abc2 includes both the second- and third-order harmonics, as
        shown in Figure 12.22(b). The feed-forward action, however, ensures that the
        corresponding line current, that is, iabc1 , remains balanced and free of distor-
        tions (see Fig. 12.20(b)). Figure 12.22(c) and (d) illustrates that since PCC2 is
        sound, irrespective of the fault Vsd2 and Vsq2 are constant functions of time and
        maug−abc2 is a balanced three-phase signal.
            Figure 12.23 illustrates the DC-bus voltage and the partial DC-side volt-
        ages of VSC1 and VSC2 when PCC1 is subjected to the line-to-ground fault.
        Figure 12.23(a) illustrates that subsequent to the fault, VDC assumes a double-
        frequency ripple component with an amplitude of about 600 V. Figure 12.23(b)
        and (c) shows that the partial DC-side voltages of VSC1 and VSC2 are periodic
        but asymmetrical. The reason is that the voltages of the DC-side capacitors in-
384               BACK-TO-BACK HVDC CONVERSION SYSTEM


                35.6
     VDC (kV)



                 35

                34.4
                       (a)



               18.15
 V11 and V21




                17.5

                16.8
                       (b)



                17.9
 V12 and V22




                17.5

                 17
                       (c)
                  1.15       1.17          1.19              1.21        1.23           1.25
                                                  time (s)

FIGURE 12.23 Total DC-bus voltage and the partial DC-side voltages of the HVDC system
of Figure 12.1 when PCC1 is subjected to a line-to-ground fault.


         clude both the second- and third-order harmonics. The second-order harmonic
         is due to the sinusoidal ripple of the net DC-bus voltage. The third-order har-
         monic is a result of the third-order harmonic of the three-level NPC midpoint
         current (see Section 6.7 for details). However, as Figures 12.23(b) and (c) illus-
         trate, the DC (average) voltages of the capacitors of each three-level NPC are
         equalized by the corresponding partial DC-side voltage equalizing scheme.
13 Variable-Speed Wind-Power
                 System


13.1     INTRODUCTION

This chapter deals with the principles of operation and control of a class of grid-
connected variable-speed1 wind-power systems, that is, the doubly-fed asynchronous
generator-based wind-power system.2
   Chapters 7 and 8 introduced the controlled DC-voltage power port, and
Chapter 10 introduced the variable-frequency VSC system. This chapter demon-
strates that a grid-connected variable-speed wind-power system, more speciﬁcally
a doubly-fed asynchronous machine-based wind-power system, in principle, consists
of a variable-frequency VSC system and a controlled DC-voltage power port. The
variable-frequency VSC system controls the turbine-generator set of the wind-power
system, whereas the controlled DC-voltage power port provides the grid interface.


13.2 CONSTANT-SPEED AND VARIABLE-SPEED
WIND-POWER SYSTEMS

Wind-power systems are broadly classiﬁed as either the constant-speed or the
variable-speed systems. The following subsections provide a brief review of the two
classes.

13.2.1     Constant-Speed Wind-Power Systems
Figure 13.1 illustrates a simpliﬁed schematic diagram of a constant-speed wind-power
system. The wind-power system is composed of a wind turbine that is mechanically
coupled, via a gearbox, to an asynchronous generator. Wind turbines naturally rotate
at relatively low speeds. Thus, the gearbox is employed to elevate the machine rotor
speed, close to the machine synchronous speed. Figure 13.1 also shows that in a
constant-speed wind-power system the asynchronous machine is directly interfaced

1 The adjectives variable speed and constant speed are deﬁned in Section 13.2.
2 In the technical literature, this class is commonly referred to as the doubly-fed induction generator (DFIG)

based wind-power system.
Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,       by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                         385
386       VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


                 Asynchronous machine                                               PCC
                                                                                 Ps
                                                     Pst                                      Grid
                                                                                 Qs
                 Gearbox Te                                                                        +




                                                                                                     −
                    N :1                  Machine                                                  +




                                                                                                     −
      ωtur Ttur            ωr                                                                      +




                                                                                                     −
         Ptur                   Pe


         FIGURE 13.1 Schematic diagram of the constant-speed wind-power system.


with the utility grid, and thus the machine synchronous frequency is imposed by
the grid. The rotor speed of an asynchronous machine is typically within ±3–8% of
the synchronous speed and is thus fairly constant. It should be noted that since the
machine operates in the generating mode, its rotor speed is slightly higher than the
synchronous speed. An asynchronous machine absorbs reactive power. Therefore,
as Figure 13.1 illustrates, the constant-speed wind-power system is equipped with
shunt compensation capacitors to maintain the voltage proﬁle and to ensure stable
operation, particularly under nonstiff grid conditions.
    The constant-speed wind-power system of Figure 13.1 is structurally simple and
rugged. However, since the rotor speed is constant, ﬂuctuations in the wind speed and
the turbine power are directly transferred to the asynchronous machine and translate
into power/voltage ﬂuctuations. This also subjects the drive train and the machine to
excessive mechanical and electrical stresses. Moreover, if the grid is not adequately
stiff, as in the case of remote wind system installations, the current ﬂuctuations typ-
ically cause voltage excursions and ﬂicker [101]. A more noticeable demerit of a
constant-speed wind-power system is its relatively poor energy capturing capabil-
ity and low capacity factor.3 We will take a closer look at these characteristics in
Section 13.3.

13.2.2     Variable-Speed Wind-Power Systems
Figures 13.2(a)–(c) illustrate simpliﬁed schematic diagrams of three dominant types
of variable-speed wind-power systems. Figure 13.2(a) shows the schematic diagram
of a variable-speed wind-power system based on the asynchronous machine. The ma-
chine frequency and rotor speed are adjusted by a power-electronic converter system
that also enables the ﬂow of real power from the variable-frequency machine to the
constant-frequency utility grid.
   Figure 13.2(b) illustrates a schematic diagram of a variable-speed wind-power
system based on the doubly-fed asynchronous machine. In the wind-power system of

3 The capacity factor of a generator, for example, a wind-power system, is deﬁned as the ratio of its actual

delivered energy over a period of time to the energy that could have been delivered over the same period,
if the generator had operated at its rated power. Obviously, the capacity factor is also a function of the
demand. For a wind-power system, we assume that the rated power is demanded. Typically, a wind-power
system has a capacity factor of about 20–40%.
                 CONSTANT-SPEED AND VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEMS                      387


                 Asynchronous machine                                          PCC
                                                                             Ps
                                          Pst                                      Grid
                                                                             Qs
             Gearbox Te                                                                +




                                                                                           −
                                                             AC/DC/AC
                N:1             Machine                   Power-electronic             +




                                                                                           −
    ωtur Ttur          ωr                                 converter system             +




                                                                                           −
      Ptur               Pe
                                                (a)

                     Doubly-fed
                asynchronous machine                                           PCC
                                                                             Ps
                                          Pst                                Qs    Grid
             Gearbox Te                                                                +




                                                                                           −
                N:1                                                                    +




                                                                                           −
                                Machine
    ωtur Ttur          ωr                                                              +




                                                                                           −
      Ptur               Pe
                                      Pr
                                                         AC/DC/AC
                                                      Power-electronic
                                                      converter system

                                                (b)
  Permanent-magnet or field-controlled
        synchronous machine                                                     PCC
                                                                             Ps
                                          Pst                                       Grid
                Te                                                           Qs
                                                                                       +


                                                                                           −
                                                             AC/DC/AC
                                Machine                   Power-electronic             +
    ωtur Ttur        ωr =ωtur                             converter system
                                                                                       +   −
                                                                                           −

      Ptur               Pe
                                                (c)
FIGURE 13.2 Schematic diagrams of three main classes of variable-speed wind-power sys-
tems: (a) based on the asynchronous machine and power-electronic converter, (b) based on
the doubly-fed asynchronous machine and reduced rating power-electronic converter, and
(c) based on the gearless-driven synchronous machine and power-electronic converter.



Figure 13.2(b), a power-electronic converter system adjusts the excitation frequency
of the machine rotor circuit. The power-electronic converter system also permits a
bidirectional power exchange between the machine rotor circuit and the utility grid.
Figure 13.2(b) also shows that the machine stator is directly connected to the utility
grid and thus its synchronous frequency is directly dictated by the grid frequency.
However, the rotor speed can be varied through the adjustment of the rotor frequency.
This electrical conﬁguration is explained in more detail in Section 10.3.2.
   Figure 13.2(c) illustrates a schematic diagram of a variable-speed wind-power
system based on the synchronous machine. The principle of operation of the wind-
power system of Figure 13.2(c) is conceptually the same as that of the system of
Figure 13.2(a). In the system of Figure 13.2(c), the power-electronic converter system
388             VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


adjusts the frequency of the stator circuit excitation to permit a variable rotor speed.
The structural difference between the systems of Figures 13.2(a) and (c) is that the
gearbox can be eliminated in the conﬁguration of Figure 13.2(c) if a low-speed (high-
pole) synchronous machine is used. The synchronous machine can be of either the
ﬁeld-controlled type [102] or the permanent-magnet type [103].

13.3           WIND TURBINE CHARACTERISTICS

Operation of a wind turbine can be characterized by its mechanical power, as given
by [104, 105]

                               Ptur = 0.5ρAVw
                                            3
                                              Cp (λ, β)   [W],                       (13.1)

where ρ is the air mass density in kg/m3 , A = πr2 is the turbine swept area in m2 , r is
the turbine radius in m, and Vw is the wind speed in m/s. Function Cp (λ, β) is called
the performance coefﬁcient or power efﬁciency and is smaller than 0.59 (Betz limit)
[105]. β and λ are the blade pitch angle [106] (in degrees) and the tip-speed ratio
(dimensionless), respectively. The tip-speed ratio is deﬁned as
                                              rωtur
                                         λ=         ,                                (13.2)
                                               Vw

where ωtur is the turbine angular speed in rad/s. Equation (13.2) indicates that λ is
the ratio of the tangential speed of the blades’ tips to the wind speed.
   Equation (13.1) indicates that for a given turbine, the power is the product of two
terms. The ﬁrst term, 0.5ρAVw   3 , is proportional to the cube of the wind speed while

the second term, Cp (λ, β), is a variable quantity. The former cannot be inﬂuenced
as the wind speed cannot be controlled. However, the latter, that is, Cp (λ, β), can be
manipulated by λ and/or β. However, based on (13.2), λ itself is a function of Vw and
ωtur . Therefore, the control of Cp indeed boils down to the control of ωtur and β.
   Cp (λ, β) is a static, highly nonlinear, function of λ and β, for which analytical
expressions are available [104, 107]. Figure 13.3 depicts Cp (λ) versus λ, for two


              0.42
                                                                              β =0
               0.3
 Cp (λ, β )




               0.2
               0.1
                                                               β = 15º
                0
                    0      2         4          6 6.85     8             10           12
                                                λ
FIGURE 13.3 Performance-coefﬁcient versus tip-speed-ratio characteristic curve of a wind
turbine.
                                                 WIND TURBINE CHARACTERISTICS               389

values of pitch angle, β = 0 and β = 15◦ . Figure 13.3 shows that Cp (λ = 0) ≈ 0,
and that when λ increases Cp also increases until it reaches a peak value at λ = λopt
(for β = 0, λopt ≈ 6.85 in the characteristic of Fig. 13.3); thereafter, a further increase
in λ results in a drop in Cp (λ). It should be noted that the peak value of Cp (λ), that
is, Cp (λopt ), is the largest when β is zero; as β is increased, the peak value of Cp (λ)
drops (Fig. 13.3), so does the turbine power, Ptur . In most wind-power systems, β
(i) is set to zero if the electrical power is below the rated value, (ii) is actively controlled
to limit the turbine power in case the power exceeds the rated value, and (iii) is set to
its maximum value, for example, 90◦ , to stop power generation under extreme wind
conditions.
    The differences between a constant-speed wind-power system and a variable-speed
counterpart can be explained on the basis of properties of Cp (λ). In a constant-speed
wind-power system, there is no control over λ since ωtur cannot be varied. Con-
sequently, λ becomes a function of Vw , and Cp (λ) cannot necessarily assume its
maximum value. This results in a nonoptimum turbine power over a wide range of
wind speeds. However, as (13.2) indicates, if ωtur is adjusted in proportion to Vw ,
then λ can be kept constant and equal to λopt to maximize Cp (λ). Thus, for any wind
speed, the turbine power assumes its maximum value based on (13.1) in which Cp (λ)
is maximized.
    The power–speed characteristic of a wind turbine can be described based on (13.1).
To simplify the analysis, we ﬁrst introduce a per-unit system as follows:
   r The machine nominal power is selected as the base for electrical and mechanical
     power, Pb .
   r The machine nominal electrical frequency is selected as the base for the machine
     rotor speed, ωb . Hence, ωb /N is the base for the turbine speed, where N is the
     gearbox ratio.
   r Based on the aforementioned power and voltage base values, the base for the
     machine electrical torque is calculated as Tb = Pb /ωb . Thus, the base for the
     turbine torque is NPb /ωb .

In our subsequent developments, we assume a two-pole machine. Thus, for the design
and the analysis purposes, the machine actual number of poles is accounted for as a
part of the gearbox ratio. Based on the per-unit system introduced above, assuming
a single-mass model for the drive train, the per-unit turbine speed is equal to the
per-unit machine rotor speed, that is, ωturpu = ωrpu . Therefore, throughout the rest
of this chapter we use ωrpu and ωturpu interchangeably.
    Figure 13.4 illustrates the per-unit power–speed characteristic of a wind tur-
bine, for different wind speeds, at zero pitch angle. Since each characteristic curve
in Figure 13.4 corresponds to a particular wind speed, the turbine power, Pturpu ,
becomes a function of only the rotor speed, ωrpu . Figure 13.4 shows that for a
given wind speed the turbine power is insigniﬁcant at small rotor speeds. How-
ever, the power increases as the rotor speed increases, until the power reaches a
peak value corresponding to the peak of Cp (λ). The power peak occurs at a ro-
tor speed corresponding to λopt , that is, the tip-speed ratio at which Cp (λ) reaches
its peak value. Thereafter, a further increase in ωrpu results in a monotonic drop
390         VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


                     β=0                                                       12 m/s
            1
           0.8
                                                                    10 m/s
  Pturpu




           0.6
           0.4                                          8 m/s
           0.2                               6 m/s
            0
                 0         0.2   0.4     0.6          0.8       1            1.2        1.4
                                               ωrpu

FIGURE 13.4 Power–speed characteristic curves of the wind turbine whose performance
coefﬁcient is characterized by Figure 13.3.


in turbine power until the power crosses the zero axis at a certain, relatively high, rotor
speed.
    Figure 13.4 also shows that the rotor speed corresponding to the maximum power
shifts toward a higher value as the wind speed increases. The reason is that, for a
constant β, λopt is a constant parameter (λopt = 6.85 for the turbine characterized by
Fig. 13.3). Therefore, as the wind speed increases, based on (13.2) the turbine must
run at a proportionally higher speed to keep λ constant at λopt .
    The power-speed characteristic of Figure 13.4 reveals the main shortcoming of the
constant-speed wind-power system of Figure 13.1 and the advantage of a variable-
speed system. Assume that the rotor speed is ﬁxed at 1.3 pu corresponding to the
maximum power for Vw = 12 m/s. Now if the wind speed drops to 6.0 m/s, the
turbine power drops to almost zero, as Figure 13.4 indicates. However, if the rotor
speed was decreased to 0.65 pu when Vw dropped to 6.0 m/s, then a power of about
0.15 pu could still be extracted. Thus, a variable-speed wind-power system generates
the maximum possible power at any given wind speed and, therefore, offers a relatively
larger capacity factor. In the next section, we present a control strategy to automatically
ﬁnd the maximum power point of a turbine.


13.4 MAXIMUM POWER EXTRACTION FROM A VARIABLE-SPEED
WIND-POWER SYSTEM

As discussed in Section 13.3, it is often desirable in a variable-speed wind-power
system to produce the maximum possible electrical power, at a given wind speed
that is lower than the rated wind speed. Once the wind speed exceeds its rated value,
the pitch angle is increased by a feedback mechanism to limit the turbine/machine
power. In this section, we present a control strategy for maximum power-point
tracking.
   Below the rated power, the turbine blade pitch angle is set to zero by a pitch angle
control scheme. Thus, to maximize the turbine power, λ must be adjusted to λopt
such that Cp (λ, β = 0) becomes equal to Cpmax , where Cpmax is the peak value of
                     MAXIMUM POWER EXTRACTION FROM A VARIABLE-SPEED                  391

Cp (λ), that is, Cpmax = Cp (λopt ). Under this condition, based on (13.2), the following
equation holds:

                                              rωturopt
                                      Vw =             ,                          (13.3)
                                               λopt

where ωturopt is the turbine speed corresponding to λopt . Substituting for Vw from
(13.3) in (13.1), we obtain

                                         0.5ρAr3 Cpmax
                          Pturopt =                         3
                                                           ωturopt .              (13.4)
                                             λ3opt

Dividing both sides of (13.4) by ωturopt , the turbine torque is given by

                                         0.5ρAr3 Cpmax
                          Tturopt =                         2
                                                           ωturopt .              (13.5)
                                             λ3opt

Equations (13.4) and (13.5) can be expressed in terms of per-unit values as

                               Pturopt -pu = kopt ωropt
                                                   3
                                                        -pu ,                     (13.6)

                               Tturopt -pu = kopt ωropt
                                                   2
                                                        -pu ,                     (13.7)

where ωturopt -pu is replaced by ωropt -pu , and the constant kopt is

                                         0.5ρAr 3 ωb3 Cpmax
                                kopt =                      .                     (13.8)
                                             N 3 Pb λ3opt

   Equation (13.6) indicates that under the constant-λ variable-speed regime, the
maximum attainable turbine power is proportional to the cube of the turbine speed
[86, 88, 108]. Equation (13.7) also shows that under the constant-λ variable-speed
regime, the turbine torque must be proportional to the square of the turbine speed [86].
Thus, an algorithm to ﬁnd the maximum power point (i) must force the turbine torque
to change in proportion to the square of the rotor speed and (ii) must ensure that
the relationship between the turbine speed and the wind speed is such that λ = λopt .
These two objectives are accomplished if the following relationship is imposed on
the machine [88]:

                                   Tepu = −kopt ωrpu
                                                 2
                                                     ,                            (13.9)

where Tepu is machine electrical torque.
392          VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


                       β=0
             1                                                      12 m/s
            0.8
                                                            10 m/s               kopt ω r2
   Tturpu




            0.6
                                                   8 m/s
            0.4
                                              6 m/s
            0.2
                      (a)
             0

                       β=0                                                         12 m/s
             1
            0.8                                                                    kopt ω r3
                                                                                               10 m/s
   Pturpu




            0.6
            0.4                                                                   8 m/s
            0.2                                                     6 m/s
                      (b)
             0
                  0          0.2    0.4          0.6          0.8            1               1.2        1.4
                                                       ωrpu

FIGURE 13.5 Graphical illustration of a maximum power point tracking strategy in which
(a) the machine torque Te is changed proportionally to ωr2 , and (b) in steady state, when the
machine torque balances the turbine torque, maximum possible power will be delivered by the
turbine.

    Mechanical dynamics are described by4
                dωrpu                                  #          $
            2H        =     T = Tturpu + Tepu = Tturpu − kopt ωrpu
                                                               2
                                                                     ,                              (13.10)
                 dt

where H is the inertia constant in s and deﬁned as
                                             
                                         1 2
                                 H=        Jω /Pb ,                                                 (13.11)
                                         2 b

where J is the moment of inertia in kgm2 , ωb is the base value for the angular speed in
rad/s, and Pb is the power base in W. A graphical visualization of the right-hand side of
(13.10) is given in Figure 13.5(a), illustrating the torque–speed characteristic of a wind
turbine superimposed on the curve describing −Tepu = kopt ωrpu     2 , that is, (13.9). As

Figure 13.5(a) indicates, if ωrpu < ωropt−pu , then Tturpu > kopt ωrpu2 . Consequently,

dωrpu /dt is positive based on (13.10), the turbine-generator set accelerates, and ωrpu
                                                                2 , dω
increases. Similarly, if ωrpu > ωropt−pu , then Tturpu < kopt ωrpu     rpu /dt is negative,


4 To be able to directly utilize the developments of Chapter 10, we adopt the motoring convention for

the machine. Thus, the positive rotor and stator currents are considered to be entering the machine, and
the machine torque and all external torques are considered as driving torques, that is, they accelerate the
machine.
                                               VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM                       393

and ωrpu decreases. Therefore, the optimum operating point is a stable one and a
steady state can be reached. In the steady state dωrpu /dt = 0, ωrpu remains constant
at ωropt−pu , and based on (13.10) Tturpu = kopt ωropt−pu
                                                   2       . This outcome agrees with
(13.7), which was developed based on the assumption of a constant λ and a maximized
power.
   The machine electrical power under the foregoing control strategy can be obtained
by multiplying both sides of (13.9) by ωrpu . Thus,

                                          Pepu = −kopt ωrpu
                                                        3
                                                            .                                    (13.12)

Figure 13.5(b) illustrates the turbine power–speed characteristic that is superimposed
on −Pepu = kopt ωrpu3 , (13.12). As Figure 13.5(b) shows, for any wind speed, the

intersection point of the two curves corresponds to the maximum power for that
particular wind speed. Note that, as (13.12) indicates, Pepu is negative since a motoring
convention has been adopted here.
   In practice, wind speed is subject to rapid ﬂuctuations, so is the turbine power.
However, due to the inertia of the drive train, ωrpu cannot assume rapid ﬂuctuations.
Therefore, the machine power formulated by (13.12) is considerably smoother than
the turbine power. Although a steady-state condition is seldom reached in practice, the
foregoing algorithm facilitates maximization of the electrical power in an average
sense.

13.5 VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM BASED
ON DOUBLY-FED ASYNCHRONOUS MACHINE

In this section, we discuss the grid-connected variable-speed wind-power system
of Figure 13.2(b) that utilizes the doubly-fed asynchronous machine and a power-
electronic converter system as the main electrical building blocks. The converter
system is composed of a variable-frequency VSC system (see Chapter 10) and a
controlled DC-voltage power port (see Chapter 8).

13.5.1 Structure of the Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Machine-Based
Wind-Power System
Figure 13.6 illustrates a more detailed schematic diagram of a wind-power system
based on the doubly-fed asynchronous machine. The wind-power system utilizes
a wind turbine that is mechanically coupled through a gearbox to the doubly-fed
asynchronous machine. The machine stator is directly connected to the grid at the
point of common coupling (PCC). The machine rotor circuit is interfaced with the
PCC through an AC/DC/AC converter system. The machine side of the converter is a
variable-frequency VSC system, whereas the PCC side of the converter is a controlled
DC-voltage power port (see Section 8.6).5 The two VSC systems are interfaced at

5 In the technical literature, these two VSC systems are commonly referred to as rotor-side converter (RSC)

and grid-side converter (GSC), respectively.
394
                                                                                                                               PCC
                                                                                                     Qf V                 Ps            Grid
                              TR                                  Ps2              Cf                          sabc
                                               isabc2                                                                     Qs          Rg Lg Vgabc
                 iabc2      Y/Delta                               Qs2                                                 isabc
                                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                                                               +       Vnull1
                                                                                                                                               − − −



                                                                                                                                               +
      Controlled DC-voltage power port                      Variable-frequency VSC system
                         VSC2      iDC2       iext   Pext   is     iDC1 VSC1                                            Ps1 Qs1
          Vtabc2                                        +                                  Vtabc1    itabc1
      L R+ron                        iloss2                      iloss1                     ron irabc                                Gearbox
                     Averaged                 C2            C1               Averaged
                    ideal three-                      VDC                   ideal three-                      Machine                  N:1
                    phase VSC                                               phase VSC
                                                                                                                         Te Ttur
                                                                                                    Pr
                                                        −

       DC-bus voltage/reactive-power
                                                                          Flux/torque controllers
                controllers


       Qsref 2      VDCref             Pext                                          Teref
                     FIGURE 13.6 More detailed schematic diagram of the variable-speed wind-power system of Figure 13.2(b).
                                        VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM               395

their DC sides. It should be noted that, practically, only one capacitor (bank) exists
at the common DC bus. However, for the sake of reference to the developments of
Chapters 8 and 10, the DC-bus capacitor is illustrated in Figure 13.6 as two separate
capacitors, C1 and C2 , corresponding to the variable-frequency VSC system and the
controlled DC-voltage power port, respectively.
    In the wind-power system of Figure 13.6, the variable-frequency VSC system con-
trols the machine torque based on the algorithm presented in Section 13.4. Since the
machine ﬂux is fairly regulated due to the direct connection between the machine sta-
tor and the grid, the variable-frequency VSC system primarily controls the machine
torque for the wind-power system and imposes the DC power Pext on the controlled
DC-voltage power port. Figure 13.6 also shows that the controlled DC-voltage power
port is interfaced with the PCC through a voltage-matching transformer. Moreover,
a three-phase set of shunt capacitors, Cf , is connected to the PCC. The capacitors
provide a low-impedance path for the switching-frequency harmonics that are gen-
erated by both the variable-frequency VSC system and the controlled DC-voltage
power port. The capacitors are required to ensure a distortion-free voltage at the PCC,
especially under nonstiff grid conditions.
    The function of the controlled DC-voltage power port is to regulate the DC-bus
voltage irrespective of the power ﬂow direction in the AC/DC/AC converter system,
that is, the ﬂow of power from the rotor circuit to the grid, or vice versa. The controlled
DC-voltage power port regulates the DC-bus voltage through the control of the real
power Ps2 , through a feedback control mechanism. To enhance the transient response
of the DC-bus voltage, a measure of Pext is also included in the voltage regulation
loop, as a feed-forward signal. The controlled DC-voltage power port can also inde-
pendently control the reactive power component Qs2 . For example, Qs2 can be set to
(partly) compensate for the machine magnetizing reactive power. Alternatively, it is
possible to regulate the PCC voltage through dynamic control of Qs2 , in a closed-loop
fashion. This option was extensively discussed in Chapter 11.
    If the rotor speed is smaller than the synchronous speed, the power ﬂows from the
grid to the rotor circuit (see Section 10.3.2). Consequently, the stator power ﬂowing to
the grid is larger than the machine total electrical power. This implies that the power
component that is drawn from the grid by the AC/DC/AC converter system enters the
rotor and is redirected to the grid through the stator circuit. However, if the rotor speed
is higher than the synchronous speed, a component of power ﬂows from the rotor to
the grid, and thus the stator power becomes smaller than the machine total power.

13.5.2   Machine Torque Control by Variable-Frequency VSC System
The control of the variable-speed wind-power system of Figure 13.6 consists of two
main tasks. The ﬁrst task is the machine torque control by means of the variable-
frequency VSC system, under the assumption that the DC-bus voltage is regulated
by the controlled DC-voltage power port. The second task is the DC-bus voltage
regulation by means of the controlled DC-voltage power port. The two control tasks
are independent of each other and thus treated separately. This section deals with the
ﬁrst task. The second task is treated in the next section.
396        VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


   As discussed in Section 13.4, to maximize the turbine power, the machine torque Te
must be controlled proportionally to the square of the rotor speed, and the correspond-
ing control law is formulated by (13.9). However, the machine torque is controllable
only through the torque reference command, Teref (Fig. 13.6). Thus, to implement
the power maximization strategy, we specify Teref -pu based on (13.9), as

                                                     Teref -pu = −kopt ωrpu
                                                                        2
                                                                            .                                            (13.13)

The underlying assumptions here are that (i) ωrpu cannot have rapid changes due to the
machine inertia and therefore Teref -pu varies relatively slowly, and (ii) the machine
torque control scheme has a fast dynamic response. The two foregoing assumptions
enable us to assume that the machine torque instantly tracks its reference value, that
is, Tepu = Teref -pu , and therefore (13.13) and (13.9) are equivalent. Detailed analysis
and design of the variable-frequency VSC system for the doubly-fed asynchronous
machine were extensively discussed in Section 10.3.2.
    Figure 13.7 illustrates a schematic diagram focusing on the variable-frequency
VSC system part of the wind-power system of Figure 13.6. In the system of
Figure 13.7, the controlled DC-voltage power port is represented by a voltage source.
This virtual voltage source must provide a voltage whose minimum (transient) value
still permits the operation of the variable-frequency VSC system and prevents the


                                                                                       Cf
                                                                                Qf
                                                                                                           Grid
                                                                                                 Vsabc
                                                                                               isabc     Rg Lg Vgabc
                                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                     −




                                                                                                                  +       Vnull1
                                                                                                                     −




                             Variable-frequency VSC system                                                        +
                                                                                                                     −




                              is      iDC1                                                     Ps1 Qs1
                    +                                             Vtabc1    isabc1
                            Pext
                                                                    ron irabc                                Gearbox
 Voltage source;                                    Averaged
 e.g., controlled   VDC                            ideal three-                      Machine                  N :1
   DC-voltage                                      phase VSC
   power port                 C1          iloss1                                                 Te Ttur
                                                                           Pr
                    −                                                                                        ωr

                                                           Flux/torque controllers


                                   ωrpu             ω 2rpu            Limitter
                                                                                 Terefpu

              ωr                                                                               Teref
                          1 /ω b           (.)2         − kopt                         Tb


FIGURE 13.7 Simpliﬁed schematic diagram of the wind-power system of Figure 13.6 show-
ing the torque-command generator in detail, but the controlled DC-voltage power port as a
voltage source.
                                      VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM             397

overmodulation, and whose maximum value is safely below the breakdown voltage
of the switch cells of the two VSCs. In order not to require an excessively high DC-
bus voltage, the rotor-to-stator windings turns ratio should also be optimized. Note
that in the doubly-fed asynchronous machine, the rotor voltage is the largest at zero
rotor speed and is zero at a rotor speed equal to the synchronous speed. Therefore,
the choice of the DC voltage range and the rotor-to-stator turns ratio must take into
consideration the machine parameters and permissible rotor speed variations.
   Figure 13.7 also shows that the three shunt capacitors at the PCC (Fig. 13.6) are
considered as part of the variable-frequency VSC system. This is done arbitrarily
to emphasize that the machine reactive power can be partly compensated by these
capacitors. It should be remembered that the shunt capacitors are primarily to suppress
the switching-frequency harmonics generated by the two VSC systems of the wind-
power system.
   Figure 13.7 indicates that the per-unit torque command is determined based on
(13.13). The torque command is saturated to an upper limit, to ensure that the
machine is not overloaded if ωrpu exceeds 1.0 pu, for example, under extreme wind
conditions.

13.5.3   DC-Bus Voltage Regulation by Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port
In the wind-power system of Figure 13.6, the DC-bus voltage regulation is carried out
by the controlled DC-voltage power port. The controlled DC-voltage power port also
enables bidirectional power exchange between the grid and the variable-frequency
VSC system or, more speciﬁcally, between the grid and the machine rotor circuit.
    As noted earlier, the controlled DC-voltage power port and the variable-frequency
VSC system can be considered as two independent entities in terms of their assigned
control tasks. The variable-frequency VSC system (Fig. 13.7) is designed and opti-
mized based on the machine torque control requirements, the range of rotor speed
variations, and the machine parameters. The design assumes that the DC-bus volt-
age is within the range that ensures sound operation of the variable-frequency VSC
system. This is achieved by the controlled DC-voltage power port for which the
variable-frequency VSC system appears as an exogenous (DC) system, that is, an
energy sink or source. In terms of operation and control, the type of the exogenous
system, whether a variable-frequency VSC system or else, is of no signiﬁcance to
the controlled DC-voltage power port; all that matters is the power that is exchanged
between the exogenous system and the controlled DC-voltage power port, that is,
Pext . Thus, in Figure 13.8 the variable-frequency VSC system part of the wind-power
system of Figure 13.6 is represented by a power source.
    As indicated in Figure 13.8, the variable-frequency VSC system imposes the power
Pext on the DC capacitor of the controlled DC-voltage power port, C2 . Depending
on the operating condition, Pext can be positive or negative in both transients and
steady state. The controlled DC-voltage power port regulates the DC-bus voltage by
adjusting the real-power component Ps2 . If VDC is larger than its respective reference
value, Ps2 is increased, and vice versa. In the controlled DC-voltage power port, the
reactive-power component Qs2 can be controlled independently. Qs2 can be set to an
398      VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


                                                                             PCC
                                                                         Ps2
                                                  isabc2                                           Vsabc
                  iabc2         Y/Delta                                  Qs2
                                                                                                    +




                                                                                                     −
                                                                                                    +      Vnull1




                                                                                                     −
                                                                                                    +




                                                                                                     −
       Controlled DC-voltage power port
                                       iDC 2    iext         is            iDC1
             Vtabc2                                     +

        L R+ron                        iloss2
                         Averaged               C2                  C1     iloss1    Averaged
                        ideal three-                   VDC                          ideal three-
                        phase VSC                                                   phase VSC



                                                        −

                          Pt2            PDC2                Pext        PDC1 ≈ Pr
                                       Vsd 2
   DC-bus voltage controller;          Vsq2     PLL          Vsabc
   reactive-power controllers          ρ 2 Fig. 13.10(a)


   Qsref 2     VDCref       Pext

FIGURE 13.8 Simpliﬁed schematic diagram of the wind-power system of Figure 13.6 show-
ing the controlled DC-voltage power port in detail, but the variable-frequency VSC system as
an external device exchanging power with the controlled DC-voltage power port.


arbitrary value within the rating of the VSC. For example, it can be set to compensate
for the machine magnetizing power. Alternatively, Qs2 can be dynamically controlled
in a closed-loop manner to regulate the PCC voltage or the power factor of the wind-
power system. The principles of operation and control of the controlled DC-voltage
power port were discussed in Section 8.6.
   As illustrated in Figure 13.8, the PCC voltage for the controlled DC-voltage power
port is represented by an ideal three-phase voltage source, Vsabc , whose neutral point
voltage is denoted by Vnull1 . This representation is made since the transmission line
inductance and resistance, Lg and Rg , are already considered as part of the variable-
frequency VSC system of Figure 13.7. However, it should be remembered that the
amplitude and phase angle of Vsabc are functions of the real and reactive power that
ﬂow through the line, especially if the line inductance is signiﬁcant.6 The impacts of
transient and steady-state excursions of Vsabc on the performance of the controlled
DC-voltage power port are mitigated through the feed-forward actions included in
the current-control scheme of the controlled DC-voltage power port (see Section 8.6).
Figure 13.8 shows that the feed-forward signals are the d- and q-axis components of

6 To see how such dynamics are formulated and analyzed, the reader may refer to Section 11.4.
                                             VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM            399

                                         Transformer

               Ll          Vsa2                        Vya                     Vsa
     ia2                                                                isa2

               Ll          Vsb2                        Vyb                     Vsb
     ib2                                                                isb2
                                        Vnull2                                       Vnull1
               Ll          Vsc2                        Vyc                     Vsc
     ic2                                                                isc2
                             1                         3Nt

                                 Windings turns ratio
             Leakage                             (a)
           inductance

                                                  Ll    Vsa2
                                  ia2

                                                  Ll    Vsb2
           Interface to           ib2
           VSC system                                          Vnull2
                                                  Ll    Vsc2
                                  ic2

                                                 (b)
FIGURE 13.9 (a) Schematic diagram of the interface transformer of the controlled DC-
voltage power port. (b) Equivalent circuit with the leakage inductance referred to the low-
voltage side of the interface transformer.


Vsabc that are provided by a phase-locked loop (PLL). The PLL also provides the angle
required for abc- to dq-frame and dq- to abc-frame transformations for the control of
the controlled DC-voltage power port.

13.5.3.1 Interface Transformer and Phase-Locked Loop (PLL) To calculate the
parameters of the d- and q-axis current controllers of a controlled DC-voltage power
port, the inductance between the VSC AC-side terminals and the PCC must be known
(see Section 8.6). In the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 13.8, the PLL
is synchronized to Vsabc . Hence, the leakage inductance of the interface transformer
(Fig. 13.9(a)) effectively adds to the inductance of the VSC system interface reactor L,
as shown in Figure 13.9(b). Thus, the effective inductance between the VSC AC-side
terminals and the PCC is L + Ll . Figure 13.9(b) also indicates that the VSC system is
effectively synchronized to the voltage Vsabc2 , which is phase shifted and scaled with
respect to Vsabc . Consequently, to analyze the modiﬁed model of the controlled DC-
voltage power port in which the interface transformer of Figure 13.9(a) is replaced
by the equivalent circuit of Figure 13.9(b), we also need to ﬁnd an equivalent model
for the PLL.
400     VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


                        Phase-locked loop of Figure 8.5
 Vsa                                                        Vsd
                 abc                                               1 /Nt           Vsd 2
 Vsb
                                                            Vsq
 Vsc                   dq                                          1 /Nt           Vsq2

                            vco Saturation Compensator
                                ω
                  ρ          兰               H (s)
                                                                                   ω

                                                                                   ρ2

                                                       π/6
                                             (a)

                                     Effective PLL
 Vsa2
                 abc                                                                Vsd 2
 Vsb2
                       dq                                                           Vsq2
 Vsc2
                                                   Effective compensator
                            vco Saturation
                                ω
                  ρ2         兰                      H (s)         Nt
                                                                                    ω
                                                                                    ρ2
                                             (b)
FIGURE 13.10 Block diagrams of (a) actual implementation of PLL for the VSC system of
Figure 13.8 and (b) equivalent model of PLL for the case where the interface transformer of
Figure 13.9(a) is replaced by the equivalent circuit of Figure 13.9(b).




   Figure 13.10(a) shows a schematic diagram of the PLL employed in the controlled
DC-voltage power port of Figure 13.8. This schematic diagram was introduced in Fig-
ure 8.5, and is duplicated here for ease of reference. Figure 13.10(a) illustrates that the
PLL receives a measure of Vsabc and provides the frequency ω, the phase angle ρ2 , and
                                                                      VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM                                     401

                    Pexteq ≈ −Pr                   PDC2                     Pt2                                  PCC
         VSC1              iexteq                                  VSC2                                    Qs2
                                  +
                                                                                                           Ps2
                                                                                        Vta2     ia2 R+ron L+Ll            Vsa2
                                                                                                                            +




                                                                                                                            −
    Averaged ideal                     ilosseq C                                        Vtb2     ib2 R+ron L+Ll            Vsb2
   three-phase VSC                                 eq         Averaged ideal
                             VDC                                                                                            +     Vnull2




                                                                                                                             −
  (variable-frequency                                          three-phase
     VSC system)                                                   VSC                  Vtc2     ic2 R+ron L+Ll            Vsc2
                                                                                                                            +




                                                                                                                             −
                                  −

                                         maug-abc2
                                                              Saturation at ± 1 ρ 2             abc      Equivalent PLL
                                                                                           dq             Fig. 13. 10(b)

                                             ρ2         Third-harmonic injected PWM
                                                         signal generator (Fig. 8.17)
                                                                                                                  ρ2
                             VDC                              md2 mq2                    id2 iq2 Vsq2 Vsd2
                                                                                                                  iqref 2 −2
                                                                                                                                      Qsref 2




                                                                                                                           ›
                                                  Compensators in the dq -frame (Fig. 8.10)                       idref 2 3Vs2

                                                                                          Pexteq ≈ −Pr

                                                                     DC-bus voltage
                                                                      compensator                 Saturation
                            VDC                         eV                                                     Psref 2
                                      (.)2 −
                                                                                                                            2
                                                               −1        KV (s)



                                                                                                                            ›
                                                                                                                           3Vs2
                        VDC ref
                                      (.)2              DC-bus voltage controller with feed-forward


FIGURE 13.11 Schematic diagram of the controlled DC-voltage power port of the wind-
power system of Figure 13.6.


the dq-frame components Vsd2 and Vsq2 .7 ρ2 is obtained by advancing the phase angle
of Vsabc by π/6 rad, to compensate for the transformer 30◦ phase delay. Moreover,
Vsdq2 is calculated by multiplying Vsdq by 1/Nt , where Nt is the transformer voltage
ratio. Figure 13.10(b) illustrates the equivalent PLL model corresponding to the modi-
ﬁed model of the controlled DC-voltage power port in which the interface transformer
of Figure 13.9(a) is replaced by the equivalent circuit of Figure 13.9(b). For the equiv-
alent PLL of Figure 13.10(b), Vsabc2 is the input while ω, ρ2 , and Vsdq2 are the outputs.


13.5.4      Compensator Design for Controlled DC-Voltage Power Port
Figure 13.11, which is similar to Figure 8.21, illustrates an equivalent model for
the controlled DC-voltage power port of Figure 13.8. Figure 13.11 identiﬁes circuit
parameters based upon which the compensator for the DC-bus voltage regulator can be
designed and optimized. As outlined in Section 8.6, the compensator design mainly
involves (i) the d- and q-axis current decoupling and control, and (ii) the DC-bus
voltage regulation and the associated feed-forward scheme.

7 The principles of operation and compensator design for the PLL are extensively discussed in Section

8.3.4.
402      VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


   Compared to Figure 13.8, Figure 13.11 shows that the interface transformer is re-
placed by the equivalent circuit of Figure 13.9(b), and therefore, the effective interface
inductance of the VSC system is L + Ll . Moreover, the resistance of the interface
reactors R also includes the transformer ohmic loss. ron represents the typical on-state
resistance of one switch cell of the VSC.8 Note that since the VSC AC-side terminals
view Vsabc2 rather than Vsabc , the equivalent PLL model of Figure 13.10(b) is consid-
ered for analysis and controller design for the controlled DC-voltage power port of
Figure 13.11.

13.5.4.1 DC-Bus Effective Capacitance and Power Loss Since we developed a
model for the back-to-back AC/DC/AC converter of the wind-power system based on
the models of a variable-frequency VSC system and a controlled DC-voltage power
port, the converter DC-bus capacitor was shown as two separate capacitors, C1 and
C2 in Figures 13.6 and 13.8, respectively; C1 and C2 corresponded to the variable-
frequency VSC system and the controlled DC-voltage power port, respectively. Sim-
ilarly, two parallel current sources were shown to represent the corresponding power
losses of the two VSC systems. However, in practice only one DC-bus capacitor
(bank) is employed for the AC/DC/AC converter. Moreover, for dynamic analysis
and control design purposes, it is convenient to lump the capacitors and the current
sources such that their effective values, Ceq = C1 + C2 and ilosseq = iloss1 + iloss2 ,
are attributed exclusively to the controlled DC-voltage power port, as shown in Figure
13.11. The reason is as follows.
    In the system of Figure 13.8, consider the part designated as controlled DC-voltage
power port; the following equation holds:
                                    
                       d 1
                              C2 VDC = Pext − PDC2 −VDC iloss2 ,
                                   2
                                                                                (13.14)
                       dt 2                          
                                                            Pt2

where PDC2 is the real power delivered to the DC-side terminals of VSC2. Since the
averaged ideal model of the VSC is dealt with, PDC2 is equal to the power leaving
the AC-side terminals of VSC2, that is, Pt2 .9 Equation (13.14) represents a power-
balance equation and describes the dynamic behavior of VDC , in response to the
control variable Pt2 and two exogenous inputs Pext and Ploss2 = VDC iloss2 . Now
consider the part of the system that encompasses C1 and iloss1 ; the following equation
can be written:
                                  
                      d 1       2
                            C1 VDC    = − PDC1 −VDC iloss1 − Pext ,             (13.15)
                     dt 2                   
                                                    ≈Pr

where PDC1 is the DC-side terminal power of VSC1 and is equal to the AC-side
power of VSC1 since an averaged ideal model is considered. On the other hand, in

8 A two-level VSC is considered.
9 It was demonstrated in Section 5.3.1 that a nonideal two-level VSC can be considered as the combination

of an averaged ideal VSC, a resistor in series with each AC-side terminal of the ideal VSC, and a current
source in parallel with the DC-side terminals of the ideal VSC.
                                                VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM                 403

TABLE 13.1        Turbine Parameters; Example 13.1

Quantity                Value                Comments

r                     35.25 m                Rotor radius
A                     3904 m2                Rotor swept area
Cpmax                  0.421
λopt                    6.85
kopt                   0.473
N                       210                  Gearbox ratio including the machine number of poles
H                       0.5 s                Inertia constant
ρ                   1.225 kg/m3              Air density


view of Figure 13.7, one understands that the AC-side terminal power is equal to the
machine rotor power, Pr , if the power loss associated with ron is ignored. Thus, PDC1
is approximately equal to Pr . Adding both sides of (13.14) and (13.15), we obtain
               ⎧                         ⎫
               ⎪                         ⎪
             d ⎨1                        ⎬
                      (C1 + C2 )VDC
                                 2
                                      = −Pt2 − VDC (iloss1 + iloss2 ) + (−Pr ) . (13.16)
             dt ⎪
                ⎩2               ⎪
                                    ⎭                                   
                           Ceq                                     ilosseq         Pexteq


   Equation (13.16) describes a power-balance equation for the capacitance Ceq =
C1 + C2 , which is subjected to the (widely variable) charging power Pexteq , the
(relatively small) discharging power Plosseq = VDC ilosseq , and the (controllable)
discharging power Pt2 . This model is illustrated in Figure 13.11. Based on the model
of Figure 13.11, the DC-bus voltage can be regulated by the control of Pt2 , while
Plosseq and Pexteq are the disturbance inputs to the control system. The transient im-
pact of Pexteq on VDC can be substantially mitigated if a measure of Pexteq is included
in the control system, in the form of a feed-forward compensation. In the model of
Figure 13.11, Pexteq is approximately equal to the negative of the machine rotor power,
that is, Pexteq ≈ −Pr . Thus, the feed-forward strategy can be readily implemented,
as Pr can be calculated based on the machine rotor speed, synchronous speed, and
the total electrical power, (10.114).10 Guidelines for the compensator design in the
controlled DC-voltage power port were extensively discussed in Section 8.6.2.


   EXAMPLE 13.1 1.5 MW Doubly-Fed Asynchronous Machine Based
   Wind-Power System
   Consider the wind-power system of Figure 13.6 with parameters given in Ta-
   bles 13.1–13.3, designed for an output capacity of 1.5 MW. The wind-power
   system is interfaced, at the PCC, with a 13.8 kV grid via a 1.5 MVA, 13.8/2.3 kV
   transformer (not shown in Fig. 13.6). The inductance and resistance of the trans-
   mission line referred to the low-voltage side of the transformer are 0.175 mH

10 The machine total power is the product of the machine rotor speed and torque. The machine torque in

turn can be calculated from irq , for example, based on (10.76).
404      VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


TABLE 13.2      Power-Electronic Converter Parameters; Example 13.1

Quantity                                     Value           Comments

Transformer TR nominal power               400 kVA
Transformer TR voltage ratio              2.3/0.6 kV         Delta/Y, Nt = 3.83
Transformer TR leakage reactance           239 ␮H            L at 0.6 kV side
Transformer TR ohmic resistance loss        9.0 m           R at 0.6 kV side
L                                          525 ␮H            Reactor inductance
R                                           19 m            Reactor resistance including R
ron                                         3.0 m           Switches on-state resistance
L + L                                     764 ␮H            Effective interface inductance
R + ron                                     22 m            Effective interface resistance
VSC units switching frequency              2340 Hz           39× 60 Hz
C1 , C2 (DC-bus capacitors)                2000 ␮F           Ceq = 4000 ␮F
Cf (ﬁlter capacitors)                        25 ␮F           Qf = 49.8 kVAr



     and 66 m, respectively. In addition, the transformer leakage inductance and
     winding resistance, also transferred to the transformer low-voltage side, are
     0.936 mH and 35 m, respectively. Thus, the effective transmission line induc-
     tance and resistance are Lg = 1.11 mH and Rg = 101 m, respectively.
        As discussed earlier in this chapter, one of the building blocks of the wind-
     power system of Figure 13.6 is the variable-frequency VSC system of Figure
     13.7. The variable-frequency VSC system uses the ﬂux observer of Figure 10.15


TABLE 13.3      Machine Parameters; Example 13.1

Quantity                      Value         Per-Unit Value        Comments

Base power                  1.678 MW             1.0              DFIG rated power
Base voltage                  1878 V             1.0              Line-to-neutral peak value
Base current                   596 A             1.0              Peak value
Base frequency               377 rad/s           1.0              ω0 , ωb
Base torque                 4.451 kN m           1.0              Electrical torque
Rotor/stator turns ratio        1.0
Rs                            29 m            0.00920
Rr                            26 m            0.00825            Includes switches
                                                                  on-state resistance
Lm                          34.52 mH            4.130
Ls                          35.12 mH            4.202
Lr                          35.12 mH            4.202
σs                           0.01736
σr                           0.01736
σ                            0.03384
τs                            1.21 s
τr                            1.35 s
                                    VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM                405

for which the parameter τ is 0.066 s. The explanations of the ﬂux observer
and its parameters are given in Section 10.3.2. The variable-frequency VSC
system also has an embedded dq-frame current controller (Fig. 10.17) whose
compensator k(s) has the transfer function

                                            s + 21.86
                             k(s) = 15.23             .
                                                s

   For the controlled DC-voltage power port of the wind-power system, that is,
Figure 13.11, we have

                                         (s + 19.18)
                     KV (s) = 299.66                      [−1 ],
                                         s(s + 2083)


                     Idref 2 (s)    2
                                 =      = 1.361 [(kV)−1 ],
                     Psref 2 (s)    s2
                                   3V


                    Iqref 2 (s)    −2
                                =      = −1.361 [(kV)−1 ].
                    Qsref 2 (s)    s2
                                  3V

The commands idref 2 and iqref 2 are handed to the dq-frame current-control
scheme of Figure 8.10, which employs the compensators kd (s) and kq (s), as

                                               s + 28.84
                     kd (s) = kq (s) = 0.764                 [].
                                                   s

Moreover, the transfer function of the feed-forward ﬁlters of the current con-
troller is
                                              1
                             Gff (s) =                 .
                                         8 × 106 s + 1

The transfer function of the compensator H(s) of the PLL (Fig. 13.10(a)) is

               142, 680(s2 + 568, 516)(s2 + 166s + 6889)
   H(s) =                                                           [(rad/s)/kV].
            s(s2 + 1508s + 568, 516)(s2 + 964s + 232, 324)

   Under the nominal grid voltage and with ird set to zero, the machine reactive
power is Qs1 = 400 kVAr, based on (10.116). The ﬁlter capacitor Cf delivers
a reactive power of Qf = 49.8 kVAr. Therefore, to fulﬁll the operation of the
wind-power system at unity power factor, the AC/DC/AC converter system is
required to deliver a reactive power of 350.2 kVAr to the grid. Since the variable-
frequency VSC system and the controlled DC-voltage power port necessarily
handle equal amounts of real power, the reactive power of 350.2 kVAr should
406                        VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


                        1.2 (a)
        VDC (kV)

                       0.82
                                                                                                VDCref
                                                                                                VDC
                                0

                                2 (b)
                 Vsa and isa




                                1
                                0                                                           Vsa(kV)
                               −1                                                           10isa(kA)
                               −2

                                     (c)
                        0.6
            Vra (kV)




                          0
                       −0.6


                 0.134 (d)
 ira (kA)




                                0
             −0.134
                                 0         0.1   0.2    0.3          0.4           0.5           0.6
                                                        time (s)
                   FIGURE 13.12 Start-up transient of the wind-power system of Example 13.1.


      also be equally divided between them. This is achieved by setting Qsref 2 and
      irdref at 175.1 kVAr and 0.063 kA, respectively, and ensures that the apparent
      powers of VSC1 and VSC2 are the same.
          Figure 13.12 shows the start-up response of the wind-power system of Figure
      13.6. Initially, all controllers are disabled, the gating pulses of both VSC1 and
      VSC2 are blocked, and the AC-side terminals of VSC1 are disconnected from
      the machine rotor.11 However, the AC-side terminals of VSC2 are connected
      to the corresponding phases of the PCC, through the interface reactors and the
      transformer TR, Figure 13.6. Each interface reactor is also connected in series
      with a start-up resistor (not shown in Fig. 13.6) to limit the inrush current.
      Thus, as Figure 13.12(a) illustrates, the DC-bus capacitor is slowly charged
      to about 820 V, through the parallel diodes of the VSC2 switch cells. Figure
      13.12(b) shows that although the wind-power system is in the start-up mode and
      exchanges a small amount of real power just to charge the DC-bus capacitor,
      the peak value of the grid current, isabc , is about 120 A. This is mainly due
      to the magnetizing reactive power of the machine of which a small fraction
      is supplied by Cf while the rest is drawn from the grid. Figure 13.12(b) also

11 By means of a three-phase circuit breaker or switch, which is not shown in Figure 13.6 or Figure 13.7.

This provision is necessary to eliminate the need for an excessively large DC-bus voltage for the scenario
where the rotor is at the standstill or spins slowly and therefore the voltage induced in the rotor windings
is relatively large.
                                               VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM                            407


                  11.5 (a)
       Vw (m/s)




                    6
 −Te and Ttur




                  0.72 (b)
                                                                                            − T e (pu )
                  0.19
                     0                                                                      T tu r (pu )
 ωtur (pu)




                  1.23 (c)

                  0.65
                  0.45


                  0.88 (d)
  Ptur and Ps




                                                                                            P tu r (pu )
                  0.13                                                                      P s (pu )
                     0
                      0      0.3   0.6   0.9   1.2       1.5   1.8         2.1      2.4      2.7           3
                                                      time (s)
FIGURE 13.13 Response of the wind-power system of Example 13.1 to a sudden increase
in wind speed.



         reveals a 90◦ phase shift between the PCC phase voltage and the corresponding
         grid line current. At t = 0.2 s, the start-up resistors are bypassed,12 the VSC2
         gating pulses are unblocked, and the controllers of the controlled DC-voltage
         power port are activated. Moreover, the DC-bus voltage reference is ramped up
         to 1200 V. Consequently, as Figure 13.12(a) illustrates, VDC tracks its reference
         command and settles at 1200 V subsequent to a small overshoot.
            Figure 13.12(c) shows that, until t = 0.569 s, the rotor voltage is a sinusoidal
         waveform with a declining amplitude and frequency. The reason is that since
         the rotor terminals are disconnected from those of VSC1, the rotor assumes an
         open-circuit voltage due to induction from the stator windings. On the other
         hand, the rotor speed rises due to wind power and the resultant turbine torque.
         Consequently, the amplitude and the frequency of the induced voltage decrease
         as the rotor speed approaches the synchronous speed. During this interval, the
         rotor current is zero, as Figure 13.12(d) shows, and the machine produces no
         torque.
            At t = 0.569 s, that is, when the rotor speed is adequately large and thus the
         rotor open-circuit voltage is sufﬁciently low, the AC-side terminals of VSC1 are

12 This is usually done by closing a three-phase switch, the contacts of which are correspondingly parallel

to the start-up resistors.
408    VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


  connected to the corresponding phases of the rotor, controllers are enabled, and
  gating pulses of VSC1 are unblocked. Thus, the rotor phase voltage assumes a
  pulse-width modulated switched waveform (Fig. 13.12(c)), and a rotor current
                                                       / The amplitude of the
  with an amplitude of 0.134 kA develops (Fig. 13.12(d)).
                                                  
  rotor current in steady state is calculated from ir = i2     + i2      (irdref =
                                                          rdref    rqref
  0.063 kA), and irqref is determined based on (13.13), the fact that ωrpu = 0.65 pu
  at t = 0.569 s, and based on (10.76).
      Figure 13.13 illustrates the overall performance of the wind-power system
  in a 3s period composed of three subintervals, that is, (i) from t = 0 to t =
  0.569 s, during which the variable-frequency VSC system is disabled and only
  the controlled DC-voltage power port operates to establish the DC-bus volt-
  age, (ii) from t = 0.569 s to t = 1.5 s, during which the variable-frequency
  VSC system is also enabled and the wind speed is constant at 6.0 m/s, and
  (iii) from t = 1.5 s to t = 3.0 s, during which the wind speed increases from 6.0
  to 11.5 m/s. At the beginning of the ﬁrst period, the turbine has an initial speed
  of 0.45 pu. Since the wind speed is rather low, 6.0 m/s, the turbine has a nonzero
  (but small) torque; however, the variable-frequency VSC system is inactive and
  therefore the machine torque is zero (Fig. 13.13(b)). Consequently, the turbine
  speed increases as Figure 13.13(c) illustrates. Figure 13.13(d) shows that de-
  spite the fact that the turbine power is positive, no power is delivered to the
  grid. The reason is that the machine torque is zero over this period. Moreover,
  as Figure 13.13(d) shows, at two incidents real power is drawn from the grid,
  that is, Ps becomes negative. These instants correspond to the DC-bus capacitor
  initial precharging process, from 0 to 820 V, and active charging process, from
  820 V to 1200 V.
      At t = 0.569 s, the turbine and machine speeds reach 0.65 pu, the variable-
  frequency VSC system is enabled, and the machine rotor circuit is current
  controlled. Therefore, the machine torque increases and catches up with the
  turbine torque, as Figure 13.13(b) illustrates. Figure 13.13(c) shows that from
  t = 0.569 s until t = 1.5 s, the turbine speed remains relatively constant due to
  the torque balance. Figure 13.13(d) illustrates that in steady state, the turbine
  power and the power delivered to the grid become equal to about 0.13 pu, that
  is, 218 kW.
      At t = 1.5 s, as Figure 13.13(a) shows, the wind speed assumes a step change
  from 6.0 to 11.5 m/s. Consequently, the turbine torque and power increase
  rapidly, as shown in Figure 13.13(b) and (d), respectively. However, unlike the
  turbine torque, the machine torque increases relatively slowly as Figure 13.13(b)
  shows. The reason is that the machine torque is changed proportionally to the
  square of the machine (turbine) speed, based on (13.13), and the turbine speed
  cannot change rapidly due to its inertia (Fig. 13.13(c)). Due to the gradual
  increases in the machine torque and speed, the power delivered to the grid also
  increases slowly (Fig. 13.13(d)). In the steady state, the turbine and machine
  torques become equal to about 0.72 pu (Fig. 13.13(b)), the turbine (rotor) speed
  settles at 1.23 pu (Fig. 13.13(c)), and the turbine power reaches a value of about
                                             VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM           409

                     (a)
−Ps1 (pu)

             0.71

              0.2
                0


             0.16 (b)
−Pr (pu)




                0
            −0.07



             0.15 (c)
 Ps2 (pu)




                0
            −0.07


             0.86 (d)
  Ps (pu)




             0.12
                0
                 0         0.3   0.6   0.9   1.2      1.5   1.8   2.1    2.4     2.7        3
                                                   time (s)
             FIGURE 13.14 Real-power ﬂow in the wind-power system of Example 13.1.



      0.88 pu, that is, 1477 kW (Fig. 13.13(d)). It should be noted that due to the
      power losses, the power delivered to the grid is slightly smaller than the turbine
      power, as Figure 13.13(d) indicates.
          Figure 13.14 illustrates the ﬂow of real power through various components
      of the wind-power system of Figure 13.6, from the start-up to t = 3.0 s. Figures
      13.14(a)–(d), respectively, show (a) the outgoing stator power, that is, −Ps1 , (b)
      the outgoing rotor power, that is, −Pr , (c) the power delivered by the AC/DC/AC
      power-electronic converter, that is, Ps2 , and (d) the net power delivered by
      the wind-power system to the grid, that is, Ps = −Ps1 + Ps2 . Figure 13.14(a)
      shows that the stator power varies between zero and about 0.71 pu, that is,
      1191 kW. However, depending on whether the machine speed is below or above
      the synchronous speed, the rotor power can be either negative or positive, such
      that it varies between −0.07 pu (−117 kW) and 0.15 pu (254 kW), as Figure
      13.14(b) shows. This is an interesting technical feature, further highlighted by
      Figure 13.14(c), as the real power that the AC/DC/AC-converter must handle is
      limited to only 0.15 pu. Figure 13.14(d) depicts the waveforms of the net power
      delivered to the grid, that is, Ps = −Ps1 + Ps2 . The two steady-state values
      of 0.12 pu (201 kW) and 0.86 pu (1443 kW) correspond to the wind speeds
      of 6.0 and 11.5 m/s, respectively; it is noted that the net power holds a cubic
      proportionality to the wind speed.
410     VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM




      FIGURE 13.15 Reactive-power ﬂow in the wind-power system of Example 13.1


      Figure 13.15 illustrates the ﬂow of reactive power among the components
  of the wind-power system of Figure 13.6, from the start-up to t = 3.0 s. For the
  time period from t = 0 to t = 0.569 s, the stator absorbs a reactive power of
  about 0.225 pu (377 kVAr), as Figure 13.15(a) shows. This value is about 95% of
  the value that we calculated based on the assumption of nominal PCC voltage
  and ird = 0. The reason for the discrepancy is that, due to the line nonzero
  impedance, the PCC voltage drops as the machine stator draws reactive power
  from the grid. This, in turn, results in a drop in the reactive power, proportional
  to the voltage reduction. As shown in Figure 13.15(b), Qs2 is zero from t = 0
  to t = 0.569 s, that is, VSC2 operates at unity power factor. On the other hand,
  the reactive power supplied by the ﬁlter capacitors is about 0.028 pu (47 kVAr)
  at the reduced PCC voltage. Thus, the resultant reactive power demanded from
  the grid amounts to 0.197 pu (330 kVAr), as Figure 13.15(c) illustrates.
      Figures 13.15(a) and (c) show that, at t = 0.569 s, the stator and the grid
  reactive power reduce to 0.128 pu (215 kVAr) and 0.1 pu (167.8 kVAr),
  respectively. This is due to the activation of the variable-frequency VSC system
  and imposition of ird = 0.063 kA. It should be noted that ird = 0.063 kA is
  adequate to compensate for 0.104 pu (175 kVAr) of the stator reactive power
  demand, under the nominal PCC voltage. However, due to the PCC voltage
  drop, the effective compensation is only about 0.097 pu. At t = 1.2 s, Qsref 2 is
  subjected to a step change from zero to 0.104 pu, which is rapidly tracked by
  Qs2 as Figure 13.15(b) shows. Consequently, the reactive-power demand from
                                            VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM                411


                                 (a)
                      1.16
      ωtur (pu)


                         1

                      0.65



                      0.38 (b)
 irabc (kA)




               0.134
                   0
              −0.134
                −0.38


                                 (c)
                             2
              Vsa and isa




                             0
                                                                                Vsa (kV)
                            −2                                                  4isa (kA)
                             1.5                    1.89         2                      2.25
                                                 time (s)
FIGURE 13.16 A close-up of the wind-power system response about the synchronous speed.



        the grid reduces to about zero (Fig. 13.15(c)), and thereafter the wind-power
        system operates at unity power factor.
             Figure 13.16 illustrates the waveforms of the rotor current, grid current, and
        PCC voltage, when the rotor speed is about the synchronous speed (or equiv-
        alently 1.0 pu). Figure 13.16(a) shows that, for the time period concerned, the
        turbine (rotor) speed increases from 0.65 to 1.16 pu. Figure 13.16(b) shows that
        the amplitude of the rotor current increases as the turbine speed increases. The
        d-axis component of the rotor current, ird , is constant at 0.063 kA to compensate
        for a percentage of the stator reactive power. However, the q-axis component,
        irq , is proportional to the square of the turbine speed and changes from 0.118 to
        0.376 kA. Therefore, the amplitude of the rotor current changes from 0.134 kA
        (at ωturpu = 0.65 pu) to 0.380 kA (at ωturpu = 1.16 pu). Based on (10.77), the
        frequency of the rotor current is equal to the difference between the synchronous
        (grid) frequency and the rotor speed. Hence, as the rotor speed increases, the
        frequency of the rotor current decreases. As Figure 13.16(b) shows, at t = 1.89
        s when the rotor (turbine) speed becomes equal to the synchronous speed, that
        is, ωturpu = 1.0 pu, the rotor current freezes momentarily. Thereafter, as the tur-
        bine speed surpasses the synchronous speed, the frequency of the rotor current
        becomes negative, and the sequence of the rotor current phases is reversed.
             Figure 13.16(c) illustrates the grid phase-a current and the corresponding
        PCC phase voltage of the wind-power system, for the period of t = 1.5 s to
        t = 2.25 s. As indicated earlier, after t = 1.2 s the wind-power system operates
412   VARIABLE-SPEED WIND-POWER SYSTEM


  at unity power factor. Figure 13.16(c) conﬁrms this by showing that the grid
  current and voltage waveforms are in phase. Figure 13.16(c) also shows that the
  amplitude of the grid current increases with the increase in the turbine (rotor)
  speed. Ignoring the system losses, one expects that the amplitude of the grid
  current is proportional to the cube of the turbine speed. Figure 13.16(c) shows
  that the PCC voltage is almost constant.
APPENDIX A
Space-Phasor Representation
of Symmetrical Three-Phase Electric
Machines


A.1    INTRODUCTION

This appendix presents a space-phasor domain dynamic model for a symmetrical
three-phase electric machine. The developments mainly concern the (squirrel-cage)
asynchronous machine, the doubly-fed asynchronous machine1 , and the nonsalient-
pole permanent-magnet synchronous machine (PMSM).


A.2    STRUCTURE OF SYMMETRICAL THREE-PHASE MACHINE

Figure A.1 illustrates a simpliﬁed electrical structure of a symmetrical three-phase
machine. The rotor and the stator each has three star-connected windings. The stator
windings are interfaced with either a three-phase voltage source or a three-phase
current source. However, the rotor windings can be either short circuited or excited
by a three-phase voltage/current source. In the former case, the machine is called the
asynchronous machine (or the squirrel-cage asynchronous machine), whereas in the
latter case, the machine is the doubly-fed asynchronous machine. For each phase,
the positive current enters the corresponding winding (motoring convention). For
each winding set, we assume that the voltages (currents) of phases b and c lag the
voltage (current) of phase a, respectively, by −120◦ and −240◦ .
    With reference to Figure A.1, the mechanical angular position is deﬁned with
respect to the magnetic axis of the stator phase a winding. Thus, the windings of
phases b and c are, respectively, located at positions 120◦ and 240◦ . We then deﬁne the
rotor angle, θr , as the angle between the magnetic axes of the rotor and stator phase a

1 In the technical literature, the term induction machine is more common than the term asynchronous

machine. However, the term asynchronous machine is more precise, as the induction phenomenon is not
exclusive to the asynchronous machine.



Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                               413
414       APPENDIX A: SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION


                          bs


                 br
                                         Vsb

                                                                          ar
                                                 V ra
                                                                         θr
                                 V rb
                                                                              as

                                                           Vsa
       Rotor               Vsc                 V rc

                                                                          Stator

                                                             Air gap
                          cs
                                        cr
         FIGURE A.1 Cross section of a symmetrical three-phase electric machine.

windings. Thus, as Figure A.1 illustrates, the rotor phase a, phase b, and phase c
windings are, respectively, located at θr , θr + 120◦ , and θr + 240◦ .

A.3     MACHINE ELECTRICAL MODEL

The machine electrical model is developed based on the concept of mutually coupled
inductors. For the sake of clarity, we introduce the stator and rotor variables with
subscripts s and r, respectively. The following assumptions are also made:

      r Neither the rotor nor the stator has saliency, and thus the air gap is uniform.
      r The ﬂux density is radial in the machine air gap.
      r The ﬂux density due to each winding in the air gap, when no other wind-
     ing carries a current, is a sinusoidal function of the mechanical angular
     position.
   r The three stator windings are identical, each with an ohmic resistance of Rs .
     Similarly, the three rotor windings are identical, each with an ohmic resistance
     of Rr .
   r Both the stator and the rotor have inﬁnite permeabilities.
   r Magnetic saturation is not considered.
                                                   MACHINE ELECTRICAL MODEL      415

A.3.1   Terminal Voltage/Current Equations
Faraday’s law requires that

                              dλsa
                                   = Vsa − Rs isa ,
                               dt
                              dλsb
                                   = Vsb − Rs isb ,
                               dt
                              dλsc
                                   = Vsc − Rs isc ,                            (A.1)
                               dt
and
                              dλra
                                   = Vra − Rr ira ,
                               dt
                              dλrb
                                   = Vrb − Rr irb ,
                               dt
                              dλrc
                                   = Vrc − Rr irc ,                            (A.2)
                               dt
where λsabc and λrabc are the ﬂux linkages of the stator and rotor windings, respec-
tively. Based on the developments of Chapter 4, (A.1) and (A.2) are equivalent to the
following space-phasor equations:
                                →
                                −
                               d λs   →
                                      −        →
                                               −
                                    = V s − R s is ,                           (A.3)
                                dt

                                →
                                −
                               d λr   →
                                      −      →
                                             −
                                    = Vr − Rr ir .                             (A.4)
                                dt
                                              →
                                              −      →
                                                     −
Equations (A.3) and (A.4) are coupled through λs and λr . In the subsequent sections,
→
−      →
       −
λs and λr are expressed in terms of the machine current.

A.3.2   Stator Flux Space Phasor
The ﬂux linked by each stator winding is a linear function of the stator and rotor
currents. For example, the ﬂux linkage of the stator phase a winding is expressed as

           λsa = Lss isa + Mss isb + Mss isc                                   (A.5)
                              + M1 (θr )ira + M2 (θr )irb + M3 (θr )irc ,

where Lss is the self-inductance of the stator phase a winding and Mss is the mutual
inductance between the stator phase a winding and the stator windings for phases b
416     APPENDIX A: SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION


and c. M1 , M2 , and M3 are mutual inductances between the stator phase a winding
and the rotor windings for phases a, b, and c, respectively. Due to the uniformity of
the air gap and the symmetry of the magnetic structure, Lss and Mss are not functions
of the rotor position, θr . However, depending on the rotor position, the rotor windings
can be aligned differently with respect to the stator phase a winding. Consequently,
M1 , M2 , and M3 are functions of θr .
    When θr is equal to either zero or π, the axes of the stator and rotor phase a windings
are aligned. When θr = 0, M1 (θr ) assumes its maximum (positive) value, and when
θr = π, M1 (θr ) assumes its minimum (maximum negative) value. Moreover, since
the ﬂux distribution is assumed to be sinusoidal, M1 is a sinusoidal function of θr .
Thus,

                              M1 (θr ) = Msr cos θr ,                                 (A.6)

where Msr is the maximum mutual inductance between a stator winding and a rotor
winding [53]. It can be deduced that when θr = −2π/3, the axes of the rotor phase b
and stator phase a windings coincide, and thus the mutual inductance between the
two windings is maximized. Similarly, when θr = 2π/3, the axis of the rotor phase-c
winding coincides with that of the stator phase a winding, and thus the mutual induc-
tance between the two windings is maximized. Thus, we deduce
                                                  
                                                2π
                        M2 (θr ) = Msr cos θr +      ,                                (A.7)
                                                 3
                                                  
                                                2π
                        M3 (θr ) = Msr cos θr −      .                                (A.8)
                                                 3

Substituting for M1 , M2 , and M3 in (A.5), respectively, from (A.6) to (A.8), we obtain

 λsa = Lss isa + Mss isb + Mss isc
                                                                          
                                         2π                             2π
       +Msr cos (θr ) ira + Msr cos θr +             irb + Msr cos θr −          irc . (A.9)
                                          3                              3

Based on the procedure that was followed to derive (A.9), similar expressions can be
derived for λsb and λsc . Thus,

λsb = Mss isa + Lss isb + Mss isc
                                                                    
                        2π                                          2π
     +Msr cos θr −           ira + Msr cos (θr ) irb + Msr cos θr +      irc , (A.10)
                         3                                           3


λsc = Mss isa + Mss isb + Lss isc
                                                
                        2π                      2π
     +Msr cos θr +           ira + Msr cos θr −      irb + Msr cos (θr ) irc . (A.11)
                         3                       3
                                                MACHINE ELECTRICAL MODEL          417

Multiplying both sides of (A.9), (A.10), and (A.11), respectively, by (2/3)ej0 ,
(2/3)ej2π/3 , and (2/3)ej4π/3 , adding the resultants, and employing the deﬁnition of
the space phasor based on (4.2), we deduce
                           →
                           −        →
                                    −             →
                                                  −
                           λs = Ls is + Lm ejθr ir ,                          (A.12)

where
                                    Ls = Lss − Mss ,
                                          
                                           2
                                    Lm =      Msr .                            (A.13)
                                           3

A.3.3   Rotor Flux Space Phasor
Similarly, the ﬂux linked by the rotor windings can be formulated as

λra = Lrr ira + Mrr irb + Mrr irc
                                                               
                                       2π                      2π
     +Msr cos (θr ) isa + Msr cos θr −      isb + Msr cos θr +      isc , (A.14)
                                        3                       3


λrb = Mrr ira + Lrr irb + Mrr irc
                                                                    
                        2π                                          2π
     +Msr cos θr +           isa + Msr cos (θr ) isb + Msr cos θr −      isc , (A.15)
                         3                                           3


λsc = Mrr ira + Mrr irb + Lrr irc
                                                
                        2π                      2π
     +Msr cos θr −           isa + Msr cos θr +      isb + Msr cos (θr ) isc , (A.16)
                         3                       3

where Lrr and Mrr are the self- and mutual inductances, respectively. Due to the
symmetry of the magnetic structure, Lrr and Mrr are constant parameters. However,
the mutual inductance between a rotor winding and a stator winding is a function of
the rotor angle θr , as discussed in Section A.3.2. Multiplying both sides of (A.14),
(A.15), and (A.16), respectively, by (2/3)ej0 , (2/3)ej2π/3 , and (2/3)ej4π/3 , adding
the resultants, and employing the deﬁnition of the space phasor based on (4.2), we
deduce
                          →
                          −      →
                                 −             →
                                               −
                          λr = Lr ir + Lm e−jθr is ,                           (A.17)

where
                               Lr = Lrr − Mrr ,                                (A.18)

and Lm is deﬁned by (A.13).
418      APPENDIX A: SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION


A.3.4    Machine Electrical Torque
An expression for the machine electrical torque can be derived based on the principle
of power balance [43, 53, 54]. The development yields the compact expression
                                    #
                                3        → −jθr $ −
                                         −         →∗ 
                        Te =      Lm Im   is e     ir
                                2
                                     #
                                3       → −
                                        −    → $∗ 
                            =     Lm Im is ir ejθr    .                           (A.19)
                                2

Equations (A.3), (A.4), (A.12), (A.17), and (A.19) describe the machine dynamics
in the space-phasor form. The equations can be expressed in the αβ-frame or in an
arbitrary dq-frame. For example, Chapter 10 introduced a dq-frame that renders the
machine model suitable for analysis and control design purposes.


A.4     MACHINE EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT

A.4.1    Machine Dynamic Equivalent Circuit
Equations (A.3), (A.4), (A.12), and (A.17) can also be used as a basis to develop an
equivalent circuit for the machine. To realize an equivalent circuit, we eliminate the
terms ejθr and e−jθr in (A.12) and (A.17), using the following transformations:
                                   → −
                                   −    →
                                   fr = fr ejθr ,                                (A.20)

or equivalently

                                   → −
                                   −    →
                                   fr = fr e−jθr .                               (A.21)

In the technical literature, (A.21) is known as referring the rotor circuit to the stator
                                      → −
                                      −  →      →
                                                −
side. Based on (A.21), replacing Vr , ir , and λr in (A.4), (A.12), (A.17), and (A.19),
                 → −
                 −    →         →
                                −
respectively, by Vr , ir , and λr , we obtain

                        →
                        −
                       d λr   →
                               −       →
                                       −              →
                                                      −
                             = Vr − Rr ir +     jωr λr ,                      (A.22)
                        dt                           
                                                rotor EMF


                             −
                             →      −
                                    →       →
                                            −
                             λs = Ls is + Lm ir ,                                (A.23)


                             →
                             −      →
                                    −        →
                                             −
                             λr = Lr ir + Lm is ,                                (A.24)
                                               MACHINE EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT           419

                                       
                                   3       →−
                                           −  → 
                        Te =         Lm Im is ir ∗ ,                            (A.25)
                                   2

                                                              →
                                                              −
where ωr = dθr /dt is the rotor angular velocity. The term jωr λr in (A.22) represents
a voltage component, proportional to the rotor speed, which can be regarded as the
rotor back EMF.
   Let us deﬁne the rotor and stator leakage factors as

                                       Ls
                                σs =      − 1,                                   (A.26)
                                       Lm
                                       Lr
                                σr =      − 1.                                   (A.27)
                                       Lm

Then, (A.23) and (A.24) can be rewritten as

                           −
                           →         −
                                     →         → −
                                               −      →
                           λs = σs Lm is + Lm ( ir + is ),                      (A.28)
                                                     
                                                     →
                                                     −
                                                     im

                           →
                           −         →
                                     −          → −
                                                −      →
                           λr = σr Lm ir + Lm ( ir + is ),                     (A.29)
                                                      
                                                     →
                                                     −
                                                     im


Based on (A.3), (A.22), (A.28), and (A.29), Figure A.2 presents an equivalent
circuit for the machine. The equivalent circuit of Figure A.2 is known as the
air-gap ﬂux model or the T-form model of the machine [109]. The equivalent    −
                                                                              →     cir-
cuit of Figure A.2 represents the squirrel-cage asynchronous machine, if Vr is zero.
                                                           →
                                                           −
→ the doubly-fed asynchronous machine, in addition to Vs the rotor, voltage vector
In
−
Vr is also controllable. The equivalent circuit of Figure A.2 is valid for both dynamic
and steady-state conditions.




     is Rs σs Lm            σr Lm                           Rr     jωr λ′r i′
                                                                            r
                                                                      +
                                                                       −




 +            +                                       +                            +

            dλ s           Lm                       d λ′r
 Vs                                                                               V′r
            dt                                       dt
                            im = is + i′r
 −            −                                       −                            −
FIGURE A.2 Space-phasor domain equivalent circuit of the symmetrical three-phase
machine.
420     APPENDIX A: SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION


A.4.2   Machine Steady-State Equivalent Circuit
                                                                                  steady-
In this section, we simplify the equivalent circuit of Figure A.2 to represent the−
                                                                                  →
state behavior of the machine. If the machine rotor is short circuited, that is, Vr = 0,
and the stator is excited by a balanced three-phase voltage with angular frequency ωs ,
we obtain
                        →
                        −
                        is = is ejωs t ,                                          (A.30)
                        →
                        −
                        ir = ir ejωs t ,                                        (A.31)
                        →
                        −                    #           $
                        im = im ejωs t = is + ir ejωs t ,                        (A.32)
                        →
                        −
                        Vs = Vs ejωs t ,                                          (A.33)

                                                      → −
                                                      −    →         →
                                                                     −
where f = fejθ is a complex number. Substituting for is , ir , and im in (A.28) and
(A.29), from (A.30) to (A.32), we deduce
                                   →
                                   −
                                   λs = λs ejωs t ,                               (A.34)
                                   →
                                   −
                                   λr = λr ejωs t ,                              (A.35)

where

                             λs = σs Lm is + Lm im ,                              (A.36)
                             λr = σr Lm ir + Lm im .                            (A.37)

                → −
                −     →        →
                               −
Substituting for is , Vs , and λs in (A.3), respectively, from (A.30), (A.33), and (A.34),
calculating the derivative, and eliminating ejωs t from both sides of the resultant, we
obtain

                               jωs λs = Vs − Rs is .                              (A.38)

                        →
                        −                           →
                                                    −       →
                                                            −
Similarly, considering Vr = 0 and substituting for ir and λr in (A.22), respectively,
from (A.31) and (A.35), calculating the derivative, and eliminating ejωs t from both
sides of the resultant, we obtain

                           jωs λr = −Rr ir + jωr λr .                          (A.39)

Equation (A.39) can be rewritten as

                                                 Rr
                             jωs λr = − #             $ ir .                    (A.40)
                                             ωs −ωr
                                               ωs
                       PERMANENT-MAGNET SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE (PMSM)                  421


      is     Rs        jσs Xm               jσr Xm            i′r
 +                 +                                   +
                                                                          Rr

                                                                    ( ω )
                  jωs λ s
                                      jXm
                                                      jωs λ ′r          ωs − ω r
 Vs
                                                                             s
                                       im
 −                 −                                   −
FIGURE A.3 Phasor-domain (sinusoidal steady-state) equivalent circuit of the symmetrical
three-phase machine with short-circuited rotor.


Multiplying both sides of (A.36) and (A.37) by jωs , we obtain

                            jωs λs = jσs Xm is + jXm im ,                        (A.41)
                            jωs λr = jσr Xm ir + jXm im ,                      (A.42)

where

                                    Xm = Lm ωs .                                 (A.43)

   Equations (A.39) and (A.42) can be represented by the equivalent circuit of Figure
A.3, which is the classical steady-state equivalent circuit of the asynchronous machine.
Based on the equivalent circuit of Figure A.3, blocked-rotor and no-load tests, which
are carried out to obtain the machine parameters, can be readily described. The term
(ωs − ωr )/ωs appearing in (A.40) and in the equivalent circuit of A.3 is referred to
as rotor slip in the technical literature.


A.5     PERMANENT-MAGNET SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE (PMSM)

The model of the three-phase AC machine, that is, (A.3), (A.4), (A.12), (A.17), and
(A.19), can be modiﬁed to represent the PMSM. The modiﬁcation mainly involves
the rotor structure; in the PMSM, no physical rotor windings exist and instead a
permanent magnet is employed for ﬂux generation. Figure A.4 illustrates a simpliﬁed
electrical structure of the PMSM.

A.5.1      PMSM Electrical Model
To model the PMSM, we assume that there is no equivalent damper winding effect
introduced by the rotor. Moreover, we neglect the rotor saliency and assume a uniform
air gap [43]. This model approximately represents the surface-magnet PMSM [54],
where the magnets are installed on the rotor surface in which the rotor and stator
structures remain the same as those of the symmetrical three-phase AC machine of
422      APPENDIX A: SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION


                            bs



      Rotor                                 Vsb
                                                                                       ar

                                                                                     θr
                                                          N
                                                                                          as
                                     S
                                                                    Vsa

                             Vsc
                                                                                        Stator

                                                                          Air gap
                           cs
                    FIGURE A.4 Cross section of the three-phase PMSM.


Section A.2.2 The stator windings constitute a set of mutually coupled inductors. Thus,
the ﬂux linked by each stator winding is a linear function of the winding current and
the currents of the other two windings as if the magnet did not exist. The net ﬂux
linked by each stator winding also has a component due to the rotor magnet. However,
this component is a function of the rotor angle. When the magnetic axis of a stator
winding is aligned with that of the rotor permanent magnet, the ﬂux is maximized
in absolute value. Since rotor saliency is ignored, the mutual inductance between
any two stator windings is constant. The ﬂuxes linked by the stator windings can be
formulated as
             λsa = Lss isa + Mss isb + Mss isc + λm cos (θr ) ,                                 (A.44)
                                                                  
                                                                2π
             λsb = Mss isa + Lss isb + Mss isc + λm cos θr −         ,                          (A.45)
                                                                 3
                                                                  
                                                                2π
             λsc = Mss isa + Mss isb + Lss isc + λm cos θr +         ,                          (A.46)
                                                                 3

where λm is the rotor maximum ﬂux. Multiplying both sides of (A.44), (A.45),
and (A.46), respectively, by (2/3)ej0 , (2/3)ej2π/3 , and (2/3)ej4π/3 , adding the

2 A PMSM with interior (buried) magnets is often attributed a nonuniform air gap and thus a salient rotor

[54]. A model for the salient-rotor PMSM is presented in Example 4.10.
                        PERMANENT-MAGNET SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE (PMSM)                  423

corresponding sides of the resultants, and employing the deﬁnition of the space phasor
based on (4.2), we deduce
                                →
                                −      →
                                       −
                                λs = Ls is + λm ejθr .                            (A.47)

where Ls is deﬁned by (A.13). Comparing the stator ﬂux equation for the PMSM, that
is, (A.47), with its counterpart for the symmetrical three-phase AC machine, that is,
                                                        →
                                                        −
(A.12), we realize that λm ejθr is equivalent to Lm ejθr ir . Thus, the electrical torque
                                                             →
                                                             −
of the PMSM can be calculated by substituting for Lm ejθr ir = λm ejθr in (A.19), and
we obtain
                                                  
                                 3          →
                                            −
                         Te =      λm Im is e−jθr .                                (A.48)
                                 2

    The stator voltage and current are related through (A.1) or its equivalent, (A.3).
Equations (A.3), (A.47), and (A.48) describe the dynamics of the PMSM in the space-
phasor form. The equations can be expressed in αβ-frame by decomposing the space
phasors into their real and imaginary components. The equations also provide a basis
for machine control, which is usually performed in a dq-frame. In case of the PMSM,
a suitable dq-frame is the one that is synchronized to the rotor angle, θr , as already
discussed in Chapter 10.
                                                                      →
                                                                      −
    To develop an equivalent circuit for the PMSM, we substitute for λs from (A.47)
in (A.3). Thus,
                             →
                             −
                            d is   →
                                   −      →
                                          −
                       Ls        = Vs − Rs is − jλm ωr ejθr .                     (A.49)
                             dt                      
                                                back EMF

Based on (A.49), the equivalent circuit of Figure A.5 can be sketched for the PMSM.
This equivalent circuit is valid for both steady-state and dynamic conditions.



                               Rs              Ls
                  is
             +                         +


                                      dλs                +
            Vs                                                  jλm ω r e jθ r
                                      dt                 −

             −                         −
          FIGURE A.5 Space-phasor domain equivalent circuit of the PMSM.
424      APPENDIX A: SPACE-PHASOR REPRESENTATION


A.5.2    PMSM Steady-State Equivalent Circuit
To develop a steady-state equivalent circuit for the PMSM, we assume that the ma-
chine stator is excited by a balanced three-phase sinusoidal voltage, and the rotor
speed is equal to the angular frequency of the stator voltage. Thus, the machine
current is also a balanced three-phase waveform. The foregoing conditions can be
expressed as
                                  →
                                  −
                                  Vs = Vs ejωs t ,                          (A.50)
                                  →
                                  −
                                  is = is ejωs t ,                          (A.51)
                                     θr = ωs t + θr0 ,                            (A.52)
                                                             →
                                                             −
where ωs is the stator excitation frequency. Substituting for is and θr in (A.47), from
(A.51) and (A.52), we deduce
                                 →
                                 −
                                  λs = λs ejωs t ,                              (A.53)

where
             λs = Ls is + λm =⇒ jωs λs = j (ωs Ls ) is + jωs λm ,                 (A.54)
             λm = λm ejθr0 .                                                      (A.55)

                 → −
                 −   →         →
                               −
Substituting for Vs , is , and λs in (A.3), from (A.50), (A.52), and (A.53), calculating
the derivative, and eliminating the term ejωs t from both sides of the resultant, we
conclude
                               jωs λs = Vs − Rs is .                              (A.56)

Equations (A.54) and (A.56) correspond to the equivalent circuit of Figure A.6, which
is the classical steady-state equivalent circuit of the PMSM.



                               Rs                jLs ωs
                    is

             +                          +


                                                             + jω λ
             Vs                       jω s λ s               −   s m



             −                          −
        FIGURE A.6 Phasor-domain (steady-state) equivalent circuit of the PMSM.
                        PERMANENT-MAGNET SYNCHRONOUS MACHINE (PMSM)                  425

   The machine steady-state electrical torque can be calculated by substituting for
→
−
is = is ejωs t and θr = ωs t + θr0 in (A.48):
                                                  
                                    3
                         Te =         λm Im is e−jθr0 .                           (A.57)
                                    2

Let is = is ejθi . Then, (A.57) can be written as
                                                              
                                        3
                            Te =          λm Im is ej(θi −θr0 )
                                        2
                                   3
                                = ( λm )is sin(θi − θr0 ).                       (A.58)
                                   2                
                                                       δ

The phase difference between the machine current and the machine internal EMF,
denoted as δ = (θi − θr0 ) in (A.58), is known as load angle in the technical literature.
For a given torque, the machine current is minimum when δ = π/2 rad.
APPENDIX B
Per-Unit Values for VSC Systems


B.1     INTRODUCTION

It is often more convenient to express a power-electronic converter system in a per-unit
term. This can be achieved based on the following per-unitization system.

B.1.1    Base Values for AC-Side Quantities
The base values for a VSC system AC-side quantities are given in Table B.1. As
shown in the table, the base voltage for a VSC system is chosen as the peak value of
the line-to-neutral voltage of the point of common coupling (PCC); this is in contrast
to the conventional power system for which the rms line-to-neutral voltage represents
the base voltage. The rated three-phase power is selected as the base power.

B.1.2    Base Values for DC-Side Quantities
The DC-side base values are determined based on those of the AC side. The base
power is the same for both DC and AC sides. However, the DC-side base voltage is
deﬁned to be two times the AC-side base voltage. This is to obtain the AC-side voltage
of 1.0 pu from the DC-side voltage of 1.0 pu, at unity modulation index. The base
values for DC-side quantities are summarized in Table B.2.

   EXAMPLE B.1              Model of Three-Phase VSC-Based Rectiﬁer
   Figure B.1 illustrates a schematic diagram of a three-phase VSC system that
   operates in the rectifying mode of operation and supplies a DC RL load. The
   open-loop model of the VSC system is described by

                          did                1
                        L     = −Rid + Lωiq + md VDC − vsd ,
                          dt                 2
                          diq                1
                        L     = −Riq − Lωid + mq VDC − vsq ,
                          dt                 2



Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

426
                                                                 INTRODUCTION         427

TABLE B.1     Based Values for VSC AC-Side Quantities

Quantity       Symbol and Expression      Description
                            3
Power                 Pb =    Vb Ib       VA rating of the VSC
                            2
Voltage                 Vb = Vs          Amplitude of the line-to-neutral nominal voltage
                             2Pb
Current                Ib =               Amplitude of the nominal line current
                             3Vb
                              Vb
Impedance              Zb =
                              Ib
                              1
Capacitance           Cb =
                            Zb ωb
                              Zb
Inductance             Lb =
                              ωb
Frequency               ωb = ω0           Usually the power system nominal frequency


TABLE B.2     Based Values for VSC DC-Side Quantities

Quantity                Symbol and Expression            Description

Power                  Pb−dc = Vb−dc Ib−dc = Pb          Same as the AC-side base power
Voltage                      Vb−dc = 2Vb
                                      3
Current                      Ib−dc = Ib
                                      4
                                      8
Impedance                   Rb−dc = Zb
                                      3
                                      3
Capacitance                  Cb−dc = Cb
                                      8
                                      8
Inductance                   Lb−dc = Lb
                                      3



                     dVDC                       30              1
                 C          = −il − iDC = −il −    md id + mq iq ,
                      dt                        4
                        dil
                     Ll     = −Rl il + VDC .                                        (B.1)
                        dt


     Let us signify a per-unitized value by the underline. Thus, for the AC-side
   quantities we have

                                       L = Lb L,
                                       R = Zb R,
                                      vsd = Vb vsd ,
428   APPENDIX B: PER-UNIT VALUES FOR VSC SYSTEMS


                         PDC             Pt
                                                                     PCC
                               +   VSC
                                                                Ps
              il
                                                                       υs-abc
                                                      R   L   iabc
              Ll    C      VDC                                             +




                                                                           −
              Rl

                               −

        FIGURE B.1 Schematic diagram of a three-phase VSC-based rectiﬁer.


                                    vsq = Vb vsq ,
                                     id = Ib id ,
                                     iq = Ib iq ,
                                     ω = ωb ω,                                  (B.2)

  and for the DC-side quantities, we obtain

                                       3
                                   C=    Cb C,
                                       8
                                       8
                                   Ll = Lb Ll ,
                                       3
                                        8
                                   Rl = Zb Rl ,
                                        3
                                   VDC = 2Vb VDC ,
                                          3
                                   il =     Ib il .                             (B.3)
                                          4

  Substituting from (B.2) and (B.3) in (B.1), and using the relationships between
  the base values as given in Table B.1, one deduces the following per-unitized
  set of equations:

                     1 did
                       L   = −Rid + Lωiq + md VDC − vsd ,
                     ωb dt
                        1 diq
                          L   = −Riq − Lωid + mq VDC − vsq ,
                        ωb dt
                   1 dVDC
                      C    = −il − (md id + mq iq ),
                   ωb   dt
                                                             INTRODUCTION        429

                                1 dil
                                  Ll  = −Rl il + VDC .                         (B.4)
                                ωb dt

It should be noted that based on the foregoing per-unit system, we do not
express the modulating signals md and mq in per-unit terms. The reason is that
the absolute values of the modulating signals are between zero and unity, and
thus expressing them in per-unit terms does not yield more insight. Equation
(B.4) indicates that each derivative term of an original equation is premultiplied
by the factor 1/ωb in the corresponding per-unit counterpart. This factor can
be avoided if the time is also expressed in per-unit terms using the base value
tb = 1/ωb . Based on such per-unitization of time, (B.4) assumes the form

                         did
                     L       = −Rid + Lωiq + md VDC − vsd ,
                         dt
                          diq
                     L          = −Riq − Lωid + mq VDC − vsq ,
                          dt
                     dVDC        #             $
                 C        = −il − md id + mq iq ,
                      dt
                          dil
                     Ll       = −Rl il + VDC .                                 (B.5)
                          dt
REFERENCES

  1. N. Hingorani and L. Gyugyi, Understanding FACTS: Concepts and Technology
     of Flexible AC Transmission Systems, IEEE Press, 2000.
  2. Y. H. Song and A. T. Johns, Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTS), IEE,
     1999.
  3. E. Acha, C. R. Fuerte-Esquivel, H. Ambriz-Perez, and C. Angeles-Camacho,
     FACTS: Modelling and Simulation in Power Networks, Wiley, 2004.
  4. E. Acha, V. G. Agelidis, O. Anaya-Lara, and T. J. E. Miller, Power Electronic
     Control in Electrical Systems, Newnes, 2002.
  5. R. M. Mathur and R. Varma, Thyristor-Based FACTS Controllers for Electrical
     Transmission Systems, Wiley/IEEE, 2002.
  6. X. P. Zhang, C. Rehtanz, and B. Pal, Flexible AC Transmission Systems: Mod-
     elling and Control, Springer-Verlag, 2006.
  7. N. Hatziargyriou, H. Asano, R. Iravani, and C. Marnay, “Microgrids,” IEEE
     Power and Energy Magazine, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 78–94, July/August 2007.
  8. H. Akagi, E. H. Watanabe, and M. Arades, Instantaneous Power Theory and
     Applications to Power Conditioning, Wiley/IEEE, 2007.
  9. T. Larsson, A. Edris, D. Kidd, and F. Aboytes, “Eagle Pass Back-to-Back
     Tie: A Dual Purpose Application of Voltage Source Converter Technology,”
     IEEE Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting, vol. 3, pp. 1686–1691, July
     2001.
 10. J. Arillaga, High Voltage Direct Current Transmission, IEE Power Engineering
     Series 6, Peter Peregrinus Ltd., 1983.
 11. V. Sood, HVDC and FACTS Controllers: Applications of Static Converters in
     Power Systems, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004.
 12. O. Wasynczuk and N. A. Anwah, “Modeling and Dynamic Performance of a
     Self-Commutated Photovoltaic Inverter System,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
     Conversion, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 322–328, September 1989.
 13. M. N. Marwali and A. Keyhani, “Control of Distributed Generation Systems.
     Part I. Voltages and Currents Control,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics,
     vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1541–1550, November 2004.



Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                       431
432    REFERENCES


 14. K. Satoh and M. Yamamoto, “The Present State of the Art in High Power Semi-
     conductor Devices,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 89, no. 6, pp. 813–821, July
     2001.
 15. B. J. Baliga, “The Future of Power Semiconductor Device Technology,” Pro-
     ceedings of the IEEE, vol. 89, no. 6, pp. 822–832, July 2001.
 16. N. Mohan, T. M. Undeland, and W. P. Robbins, Power Electronics, Converters,
     Applications, and Design, 3rd edition, Wiley, 2003.
 17. B. Wu, High-Power Converters and AC Drives, Wiley/IEEE, 2006.
 18. A. Alesina and M. G. B. Venturini, “Analysis and Design of Optimum-Amplitude
     Nine-Switch Direct AC–AC Converters,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electron-
     ics, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 101–112, January 1989.
 19. S. B. Dewan and A. Straughn, Power Semiconductor Circuits, Wiley, 1974.
 20. D. G. Holmes and T. A. Lipo, Pulse Width Modulation for Power Converters:
     Principles and Practice, Wiley/IEEE, 2003.
 21. M. Saeedifard, H. Nikkhajoei, R. Iravani, and A. Bakhshai, “A Space Vec-
     tor Modulation Approach for a Multimodule HVDC Converter System,” IEEE
     Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1643–1654, July 2007.
 22. M. Hagiwara, H. Fujita, and H. Akagi, “Performance of a Self-Commutated
     BTB HVDC Link System Under a Single-Line-to-Ground Fault Condition,”
     IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 278–285, January
     2003.
 23. C. Schauder, M. Gernhardt, E. Stacey, T. Lemak, L. Gyugyi, T.W. Cease, and
     A. Edris, “Development of ±100 MVAR Static Condenser for Voltage Control
     of Transmission Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 10, no.
     3, pp. 1486–1493, July 1995.
 24. J. Holtz, “Pulsewidth modulation: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
     Electronics, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 410–420, December 1992.
 25. H. W. Van Der Broeck, H. Skudelny, and G. V. Stanke, “Analysis and Realiza-
     tion of a Pulsewidth Modulator Based on Voltage Space Vectors,” IEEE Trans-
     actions on Industry Applications, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 142–150, January/February
     1988.
 26. R. Wu, S. B. Dewan, and G. R. Slemon, “Analysis of an AC-to-DC Voltage
     Source Converter Using PWM with Phase and Amplitude Control,” IEEE Trans-
     actions on Industry Applications, vol. 27, pp. 355–364, March/April 1991.
 27. A. Nabavi Niaki and M. R. Iravani, “Steady-State and Dynamic Models of Uni-
     ﬁed Power Flow Controller (UPFC) for Power System Studies,” IEEE Transac-
     tions on Power Systems, vol. 11, pp. 1937–1942, November 1996.
 28. J. A. Sanders and F. Verhulst, Averaging Methods in Nonlinear Dynamic Systems,
     Springer-Verlag, 1985.
 29. H. A. Khalil, Nonlinear Systems, 3rd edition, Prentice-Hall, 2002.
 30. J. G. Kassakian, M. F. Schlecht, and G. C. Verghese, Principles of Power Elec-
     tronics, Addison-Wesley, 1991.
                                                             REFERENCES       433

31. P. T. Krein, J. Bentsman, R. M. Bass, and B. L. Lesieutre, “On the Use of
    Averaging for the Analysis of Power Electronic Systems,” IEEE Transactions
    on Power Electronics, vol. 5, pp. 182–190, April 1990.
32. R. W. Erickson and D. Maksimovic, Fundamentals of Power Electronics, 2nd
    edition, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
33. E. Davison, “The Robust Control of a Servomechanism Problem for Linear
    Time-Invariant Multivariable Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Con-
    trol, vol. AC-21, no. 1, pp. 25–34, February 1976.
34. W. M. Wonham, “Towards an Abstract Internal Model Principle,” IEEE Trans-
    actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. SMC-6, no. 11, pp. 735–740,
    November 1976.
35. P. J. Antsaklis and O. R. Gonzalez, “Compensator Structure and Internal Models
    in Tracking and Regulation,” Proceedings of 23rd Conference on Decision and
    Control, Las Vegas, NV, pp. 634–635, December 1984.
36. G. F. Franklin and A. E. Naeini, “Design of Ripple-Free Multivariable Robust
    Servomechanisms,” Proceedings of 23rd Conference on Decision and Control,
    Las Vegas, NV, pp. 1709–1714, December 1984.
37. J. J. D’Azzo and C. H. Houpis, Linear Control System Analysis and Design:
    Conventional and Modern, 4th edition, McGraw-Hill, 1995.
38. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, 4th edition, Prentice-Hall, 2001.
39. X. Yuan, W. Merk, H. Stemler, and J. Allmeling, “Stationary-Frame Generalized
    Integrators for Current Control of Active Power Filters with Zero Steady-State
    Error for Current Harmonics of Concern Under Unbalanced and Distorted Op-
    erating Conditions,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 38, no.
    2, pp. 523–532, March/April 2002.
40. D. N. Zmood and D. G. Holmes, “Stationary Frame Current Regulation of PWM
    Inverters with Zero Steady-State Error,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electron-
    ics, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 814–822, May 2003.
41. H. Akagi, Y. Kanazawa, and A. Nabae, “Instantaneous Reactive Power Compen-
    sators Comprising Switching Devices Without Energy Storage Components,”
    IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. IA-20, no. 3, pp. 625–630,
    May/June 1984.
42. P. Kundur, Power System Stability and Control, McGraw-Hill, 1994.
43. W. Leonhard, Control of Electrical Drives, 3rd edition, Springer-Verlag,
    2001.
44. L. Angquist and L. Lindberg, “Inner Phase Angle Control of Voltage Source
    Converter in High Power Applications,” IEEE Power Electronics Specialists
    Conference PESC 91, pp. 293–298, June 1991.
45. L. Xu, V. G. Agelidis, and E. Acha, “Development Considerations of DSP-
    Controlled PWM VSC-Based STATCOM,” IEE Proceedings: Electric Power
    Application, vol. 148, no. 5, pp. 449–455, September 2001.
46. A. R. Bergen, Power System Analysis, Prentice-Hall, 1986.
434    REFERENCES


 47. M. C. Chandorkar, D. M. Divan, and R. Adapa, “Control of Parallel Connected
     Inverters in Standalone AC Supply Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
     Applications, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 136–143, January/February 1993.
 48. M. H. Rashid, Power Electronics, Circuits, Devices, and Applications, 3rd edi-
     tion, Pearson Prentice-Hall, 2003.
 49. S. Chung, “A Phase Tracking System for Three Phase Utility Interface In-
     verters,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 15, pp. 431–438, May
     2000.
 50. A. B. Plunkett and F. G. Turnbull, “Load-Commutated Inverter/Synchronous
     Motor Drive Without a Shaft Position Sensor,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
     Applications, vol. IA-15, no. 1, pp. 63–71, January/February 1979.
 51. R. Wu and G. R. Slemon, “A Permanent Magnet Motor Drive Without a Shaft
     Sensor,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1005–
     1011, September/October 1991.
 52. T. Noguchi, K. Yamada, S. Kondo, and I. Takahashi, “Initial Rotor Position
     Estimation Method of Sensorless PM Synchronous Motor with No Sensitivity
     to Armature Resistance,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 45,
     no. 1, pp. 118–125, February 1998.
 53. P. C. Krause, O. Wasynczuk, and S. D. Sudhoff, Analysis of Electric Machinery,
     IEEE Press, 1995.
 54. P. Vas, Vector Control of AC Machines, Oxford University Press, 1990.
 55. K. Thorborg, Power Electronics, Prentice-Hall, 1988.
 56. J. S. Lai and F. Z. Peng, “Multilevel Converters: A New Breed of Power Con-
     verters,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 32, pp. 509–517,
     May/June 1996.
 57. J. Rodriguez, J. Pontt, G. Alzamora, N. Becker, O. Einenkel, and A. Weinstein,
     “Novel 20-MW Downhill Conveyor System Using Three-Level Converters,”
     IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 49, pp. 1093–1100, October
     2002.
 58. J. Rodriguez, J. S. Lai, and F. Z. Peng, “Multilevel Inverters: A Survey of Topolo-
     gies, Control, and Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics,
     vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 724–738, August 2002.
 59. A. Nabae, I. Takahashi, and H. Akagi, “A New Neutral-Point-Clamped PWM
     Inverter,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. IA-17, pp. 518–523,
     September/October 1981.
 60. R. Sommer, A. Mertens, C. Brunotte, and G. Trauth, “Medium Voltage Drive
     System with NPC Three-Level Inverter Using IGBTs,” IEEE PWM Medium
     Voltage Drives Seminar, pp. 3/1–3/5, May 11, 2000.
 61. A. Yazdani and R. Iravani, “A Generalized State-Space Averaged Model of the
     Three-Level NPC Converter for Systematic DC-Voltage-Balancer and Current-
     Controller Design,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 20, no. 2, pp.
     1105–1114, April 2005.
                                                              REFERENCES       435

62. D. H. Lee, S. R. Lee, and F. C. Lee, “An Analysis of Midpoint Balance for the
    Neutral-Point-Clamped Three-Level VSI,” IEEE Power Electronics Specialists
    Conference, PESC98, vol. 1, pp. 193–199, May 17–22, 1998.
63. C. Newton and M. Sumner, “A Novel Arrangement for Balancing the Capacitor
    Voltages of a Five-Level Diode Clamped Inverter,” IEE Power Electronics and
    Variable Speed Drives, no. 456, pp. 465–470, September 21–23, 1998.
64. M. K. Mishra, A. Joshi, and A. Ghosh, “Control Schemes for Equalization of
    Capacitor Voltages in Neutral Clamped Shunt Compensator,” IEEE Transactions
    on Power Delivery, vol. 18, pp. 538–544, April 2003.
65. C. Newton and M. Sumner, “Neutral Point Control for Multi-Level inverters:
    Theory, Design and Operational Limitations,” IEEE Industry Application Society
    Annual Meeting, pp. 1336–1343, October 5–9, 1997.
66. G. Scheuer and H. Stemmler, “Analysis of a 3-Level-VSI Neutral-Point-Control
    for Fundamental Frequency Modulated SVC-Applications,” IEE AC and DC
    Power Transmission, no. 423, pp. 303–310, April 29–May 3, 1996.
67. C. Osawa, Y. Matsumoto, T. Mizukami, and S. Ozaki, “A State-Space Model-
    ing and a Neutral-Point Voltage Control for an NPC Power Converter,” Power
    Conversion Conference, vol. 1, pp. 225–230, August 3–6, 1997.
68. M. P. Kazmierkowski and L. Malesani, “Current-Control Techniques for Three-
    Phase Voltage-Source PWM Converters: A Survey,” IEEE Transactions on In-
    dustrial Electronics, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 691–703, October 1998.
69. C. D. Schauder and R. Caddy, “Current Control of Voltage-Source Inverters
    for Fast Four-Quadrant Drive Performance,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
    Electronics, vol. IA-18, pp. 163–171, March/April 1982.
70. J. A. Houldsworth and D. A. Grant, “The Use of Harmonic Distortion to In-
    crease the Output Voltage of a Three-Phase PWM Inverter,” IEEE Transac-
    tions on Industry Applications, vol. IA-20, pp. 1224–1228, September/October
    1984.
71. M. Mohaddes, D. P. Brandt, and K. Sadek, “Analysis and Elimination of
    Third Harmonic Oscillations in Capacitor Voltages of 3-Level Voltage Source
    converters,” IEEE PES Summer Meeting, vol. 2, pp. 737–741, July 16–20,
    2000.
72. A. Yazdani and R. Iravani, “An Accurate Model for the DC-Side Voltage Control
    of the Neutral Point Diode Clamped Converter,” IEEE Transactions on Power
    Delivery, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 185–193, January 2006.
73. R. Pena, R. Cardenas, R. Blasco, G. Asher, and J. Clare, “A Cage Induction Gen-
    erator Using Back to Back PWM Converters for Variable Speed Grid Connected
    Wind Energy System,” IEEE Industrial Electronics Conference, IECON’01, vol.
    2, pp. 1376–1381, 2001.
74. C. K. Sao, P. W. Lehn, M. R. Iravani, and J. A. Martinez, “A Benchmark
    System for Digital Time-Domain Simulation of a Pulse-Width-Modulated
    D-STATCOM,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 17, pp. 1113–1120,
    October 2002.
436    REFERENCES


 75. Y. Ye, M. Kazerani, and V. H. Quintana, “Modeling, Control, and Implementa-
     tion of Three-Phase PWM Converters,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electron-
     ics, vol. 18, pp. 857–864, May 2003.
 76. P. W. Lehn and M. R. Iravani, “Experimental Evaluation of STATCOM Closed-
     Loop Dynamics,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 13, pp. 1378–1384,
     October 1998.
 77. T. M. Rowan and R. J. Kerkman, “A New Synchronous Current Regulator and an
     Analysis of Current-Regulated PWM Inverters,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
     Applications, vol. IA-22, no. 4, pp. 678–690, March/April 1986.
 78. V. Kaura and V. Blasko, “Operation of a Phase Locked Loop System Under Dis-
     torted Utility Conditions,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 33,
     no. 1, pp. 58–63, January/February 1997.
 79. J. Svensson, “Synchronization Methods for Grid-Connected Voltage Source
     Converters,” IEE Proceedings: Generation, Transmission, and Distribution, vol.
     148, no. 3, pp. 229–235, May 2001.
 80. L. G. B. Rolim, D. R. da Costa, and M. Aredes, “Analysis and Software Imple-
     mentation of a Robust Synchronizing PLL Circuit Based on pq Theory,” IEEE
     Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1919–1926, December
     2006.
 81. D. A. Paice, Power Electronics Converter Harmonics: Multipulse Methods for
     Clean Power, Wiley/IEEE Press, 1999.
 82. C. Schauder and H. Mehta, “Vector Analysis and Control of Advanced
     Static VAR Compensators,” IEE Proceedings C, vol. 140, pp. 299–306, July
     1993.
 83. A. Yazdani, “Control of an Islanded Distributed Energy Resource Unit with
     Load Compensating Feed-Forward,” IEEE Power Engineering Society General
     Meeting, 7 pp. July 20–24, 2008.
 84. M. B. Delghavi and A. Yazdani, “A Control Strategy for Islanded Operation of
     a Distributed Resource (DR) Unit,” IEEE Power and Energy Society General
     Meeting, 8 pp. July 26–30, 2009.
 85. H. Karimi, A. Yazdani, and R. Iravani, “Negative Sequence Current Injection
     for Fast Islanding Detection of a Distributed Resource Unit,” IEEE Transactions
     on Power Electronics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 298–307, January 2008.
 86. R. Pena, J. C. Clare, and G. M. Asher, “A Doubly-Fed Induction Generator
     Using Back-to-Back PWM Converters Supplying an Isolated Load from a Vari-
     able Speed Wind Turbine,” IEE Proceedings on Power Applications, vol. 143,
     pp. 380–387, September 1996.
 87. S. Muller, M. Deicke, and R. W. De Donker, “Adjustable Speed Generators for
     Wind Turbines Based on Doubly-Fed Induction Machines and 4-Quadrant IGBT
     Converters Linked to the Rotor,” IEEE Industry Applications Magazine, vol. 8,
     no. 3, pp. 26–33, May/June 2002.
 88. R. Datta and V. T. Ranganathan, “Variable-Speed Wind-Power Generation
     Using Doubly-Fed Wound-Rotor Induction Machine: A Comparison with
                                                                REFERENCES       437

     Alternative Schemes,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 17, no. 3,
     pp. 414–421, September 2002.
 89. D. W. Novotny and T. A. Lipo, Vector Control and Dynamics of AC Drives,
     Oxford University Press, 1996.
 90. B. K. Bose, Power Electronics and Variable Frequency Drives, IEEE Press,
     1997.
 91. R. Cardenas, R. Pena, G. M. Asher, J. Clare, and R. Blasco-Gimenez, “Con-
     trol Strategies for Power Smoothing Using a Flywheel Driven by a Sensorless
     Vector-Controlled Induction Machine Operating in a Wide Speed Range,” IEEE
     Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 603–614, June 2004.
 92. T. M. Jahns, G. B. Kliman, and T. W. Neumann, “Interior PM Synchronous Mo-
     tors for Adjustable-Speed Drives,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications,
     vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 738–747, July/August 1986.
 93. B. K. Bose, “A High-Performance Inverter-Fed Drive System of an Interior
     Permanent Magnet Synchronous Machine,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Ap-
     plications, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 987–997, November/December 1988.
 94. S. Y. Morimoto, Y. Takeda, T. Hirasa, and K. Taniguchi, “Expansion of Operating
     Limits for Permanent Magnet Motor by Current Vector Control Considering
     Inverter Capacity,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 26, no. 5,
     pp. 866–871, September/October 1990.
 95. R. Mihalic, P. Zunko, I. Papic, and D. Povh, “Improvement of Transient Stability
     by Insertion of FACTS Devices,” IEEE/NTUA Proceedings of Athens Power Tech
     Conference, APT 93, vol. 2, pp. 521–525, September 1993.
 96. J. F. Gronquist, W. A. Sethares, F. L. Alvarado, and R. H. Lasseter, “Power Os-
     cillation Damping Control Strategies for FACTS Devices Using Locally Mea-
     surable Quantities,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 10, no. 3, pp.
     1598–1605, August 1995.
 97. E. Stacey, T. Lemak, L. Gyugyi, T. W. Cease, and A. Edris, “Operation of −100
     MVAr TVA STATCON,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 12, no. 4,
     pp. 1805–1811, October 1997.
 98. M. Noroozian, A. Edris, D. Kidd, and A. J. F. Keri, “The Potential Use of
     Voltage-Sourced Converter-Based Back-to-Back Tie in Load Restoration,” IEEE
     Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 18, pp. 1416–1421, October 2003.
 99. G. C. Paap, “Symmetrical Components in the Time-Domain and Their Appli-
     cations to Power Network Calculations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
     vol. 15, pp. 522–528, May 2000.
100. L. Moran, P. D. Ziogas, and G. Joos, “Design Aspects of Synchronous PWM
     Rectiﬁer-Inverter Systems Under Unbalanced Input Voltage Conditions,” IEEE
     Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1286–1293, Novem-
     ber/December 1992.
101. T. Sun, Z. Chen, and F. Blaabjerg, “Flicker Study on Variable Speed Wind
     Turbines with Doubly-Fed Induction Generators,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
     Conversion, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 896–905, December 2005.
438    REFERENCES


102. A. Yazdani and R. Iravani, “A Neutral-Point Clamped Converter System for
     Direct-Drive Variable-Speed Wind Power Unit,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
     Conversion, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 596–607, June 2006.
103. M. Chinchilla, S. Arnaltes, and J. C. Burgos, “Control of Permanent-Magnet
     Generators Applied to Variable-Speed Wind-Energy Systems Connected to the
     Grid,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 130–135,
     March 2006.
104. P. M. Anderson and A. Bose, “Stability Simulations of Wind Turbine Systems,”
     IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, vol. PAS-102, pp. 3791–
     3795, December 1983.
105. M. P. Kazmierkowski, R. Krishnan, and F. Blaabjerg, Control in Power Elec-
     tronics, Selected Problems, Academic Press, 2002.
106. S. Heier, Grid Integration of Wind Energy Conversion Systems, 2nd edition,
     Wiley, 2006.
107. J. G. Slootweg, H. Polinder, and W. L. Kling, “Representing Wind Turbine
     Electrical Generating Systems in Fundamental Frequency Simulations,” IEEE
     Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 516–524, December
     2003.
108. Y. D. Song and B. Dhinakaran, “Nonlinear Variable Speed Control of Wind Tur-
     bines,” IEEE Proceedings of International Conference on Control Applications,
     pp. 814–819, August 1999.
109. G. R. Slemon, “Modelling of Induction Machines for Electric Drives,” IEEE
     Industry Application Society Annual Meeting, pp. 111–115, 1988.
INDEX

A                                                      vector control, 283
AC/DC/AC converter system, 2, 387,                   Averaging operator, 33
       395, 405                                        deﬁnition, 33
AC machine, rapid torque control, 287                  nonlinear systems theory, 33
AC-side base voltage, 426
AC-side equivalent circuit, 48,                      B
       226–232                                       Back-to-back HVDC system, 336,
AC-side powers, 43                                           338–342, 375
AC-side quantities, 426                                controlled DC-voltage power port,
  converter, based values, 427                               339
AC-side terminal voltage, 41, 117,                     grid models, 336–338
       120, 121, 135, 139, 159, 170,                      circuit equivalent, 338
       172, 173, 175, 182, 224                            neutral point, 336
  amplitude, 172, 173, 224                                schematic diagram of, 337
  average, 41                                          interface transformer models,
  harmonic spectrum, 158                                     336–338
  source, 24, 49, 54                                      circuit equivalent, 338
  use, 175                                                schematic diagram of, 337
AC system, 74, 85, 86                                  operational strategy of, 336
  dynamics, decoupling, 56, 57                         performance, 375
  frequency, 170                                       real/reactive-power controller, 339
  reactive power, 169                                Balanced three-phase function, 70–82
  three-phase voltage, 160                             controllable-amplitude/controllable-
  voltage, resynchronization, 266–269                        frequency generation, 78–81
AC voltage controller, 326, 333                        frequency change of three-phase
  compensator design, 326                                    signal, 78
Air-gap ﬂux model, 419                                 space phasor, 70
Alternative stator-ﬂux model, 296                         deﬁnition, 70–73
  block diagram, 296                                      representation, 70, 81–82
Angular frequency, 70, 79, 82, 228,                    three phase signal, 73
       290, 345, 420, 424                                 amplitude/phase-angle change,
Asynchronous machine, 274–288, 413                           73–78
  parameters, 283                                    Balanced three-phase linear circuit,
  steady-state equivalent circuit, 282                       226

Voltage-Sourced Converters in Power Systems,   by Amirnaser Yazdani and Reza Iravani
Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                       439
440    INDEX


Bidirectional switch, See Bipolar         Controlled DC-voltage power port,
       switch                                     189–203, 234–244, 313–314,
Bipolar switch, 7                                 397–401
Bridge rectiﬁers, 143                       compensator design, 401–412
                                               DC-bus effective capacitance,
C                                                 402–412
Capacitance, power-balance equation,           power loss, 402–412
        403                                 control, 237–242
Capacitors, DC voltage difference, 146      DC-bus voltage behavior, 199, 200
Cartesian coordinate system, 91             DC-bus voltage regulation, 397–401
Closed-loop control system, 124, 166           interface transformer, 399–401
  bandwidth, 166, 202, 375                     phase-locked loop, 399–401
Closed-loop d-axis current controllers,     dynamic performance, 241, 243
        309                                 equivalent model, 400
  permanent magnet synchronous              interface transformer, schematic
        machine (PMSM), 309                       diagram, 399
Closed-loop DC-bus voltage                  model, 191–195, 235–237
        controller, 202                     objective, 234
  root loci, 202                            PCC voltage, 398
Closed-loop half-bridge converter           response, 241
        system, 50, 58                      schematic diagram, 190, 194, 235
  control block diagram, 50               Controlled-frequency voltage-sourced
Closed-loop q-axis current controllers,           converter system, 245–247,
        309                                       253, 254, 259–261
  permanent magnet synchronous              control block diagram, 255
        machine (PMSM), 309                 control process, 254
Closed-loop scheme, 117, 123, 125,          dq-frame model, 245
        149, 276                            dynamic response, 261
Closed-loop system, 151, 184, 185, 198,     model, 247–253
203, 204, 237, 239, 244, 257                objective, 253
  bandwidth, 184                            performance, 260
Closed-loop transfer function, 51           schematic diagram, 246
Closed-loop voltage, 151                    start-up transient, 259, 260
Commutation process, deﬁnition, 8           step response, 259, 260
Composite control plant, 125                structure, 246–247
Composite load, dynamic model,            Control system loop gain, 51
        251–243                           Conventional phasor analysis, 226
Constant-speed wind-power systems,        Conventional sinusoidal PWM, 176
        385–386                             modulating signal, 176
  demerit, 386                            Converter AC-side current, 142, 183
  schematic diagram, 386                  Converter AC-side voltage, 117, 133
Controllable-frequency/amplitude            terminal, 117
        three-phase signal generator,     Converter averaged model, 32–38
        95                                Converter conduction loss, 120
  block diagram, 96                       Converter fundamental voltage, 142
                                                                 INDEX      441

Converter power loss, 31                  DC-bus voltage controller, 196, 197,
Converters, category, 2                          199, 201, 237, 238, 240, 244,
Converter switched model, 27–31                  330, 353, 365, 371, 377, 381
Converter system, 56, 57, 144, 187          compensator, transfer function, 377
  limitation, 144                           control block diagram, 237, 353
  modulating signals, 187                   design, 196–200, 238–242
  partial DC-side voltages, 187             instability, 244
  transient response, 56, 57                loop gain, Bode plot, 197, 240
  voltage equalizing corrective offset,     objective, 365
       187                                DC-bus voltage control, 195, 371–384
Converter system and AC system, 54          controlled DC-voltage power port,
  dynamic coupling, impact, 54–57                195–200
Converter waveforms, 26–27                  dynamic analysis, 374–384
  negative AC-side current, 27              loop, 195, 196, 242374
  positive AC-side current, 27                 control block diagram, 195, 374
Current-controlled real/reactive-power         gain crossover frequency, 196
       controller, 163, 207               DC-bus voltage regulator, 401
  schematic diagram, 163, 207               control block diagram, 375
Current-controlled voltage-sourced        DC capacitors, 144
       converter system, 85, 221, 247,      voltage ripple, impact, 155–159
       248                                DC-side currents, derivation, 152–153
  circuit diagram, 86                     DC-side voltage, 142, 149, 150, 158,
  control block diagram, 220, 248                159, 188
  simpliﬁed block diagram, 221              circuit model, 149, 150
Current-control loops, 280                  sources, 142
Current-mode control strategy, 162,         three-level NPC, 188
       163, 207                             balancer, 156
  advantages, 162, 207                    DC-side voltage equalizing scheme,
Current-mode vs. voltage-mode                    146–152, 181–182, 232, 238,
       control, 162–163, 206–208                 271, 376, 384
Current-sourced converter (CSC), 7, 9       control block diagram, 152, 181,
                                                 182, 233
D                                           controllers, 238
DC/AC voltage-sourced converter             loop gain, 181
        (VSC), 2, 9, 23, 38, 48           DC-voltage power port, 199, 338, 340,
  converter structure, 23–25                     345, 350
DC-bus capacitors, 196, 199, 205,         Decoupling mechanism, 380
        338–340, 351, 364, 373            Diode bridges, 143
DC-bus voltage, 173, 336, 346, 360,         rectiﬁer, DC/AC converter, 2
        369, 374, 379                     Diode-clamped converter (DCC), 16,
  compensator, 373                               18
  dynamics, 242, 360–365                    DC capacitor voltage drift
  level, 168, 224, 225                           phenomenon, 18
     selection, 168–173, 224–226            ﬁve-level, schematic diagram, 19
  steady-state analysis, 371–373            multilevel, application, 19
442    INDEX


Distributed energy resource (DER)        Feed-forward ﬁlters, transfer function,
       unit, 4                                   377
Distributed generation (DG) units, 160   Feed-forward signals, 152, 163, 200,
Disturbance rejection capability, 57             208, 247
  impact, 57–59                          Flexible AC transmission system
Doubly-fed asynchronous machine,                 (FACTS) controllers, 4, 74
       288–307, 393–412                    intertie power ﬂow controller
  controlled DC-voltage power port,              (IPFC), 4
       397, 401                            static compensator (STATCOM), 4
     compensator design, 401–412           static synchronous series
     DC-bus voltage regulation, 397              compensator (SSSC), 4
  variable-frequency VSC system,           uniﬁed power ﬂow controller
       395                                       (UPFC), 4
     machine torque control, 395         Flux model, 276
  variable-speed wind-power system,      Flywheel energy storage system,
       structure of, 393                         287
  vector control, 303–307                Forced-commutated converter, 9
dq-Frame coordinate systems, 103         Fourier series, 139
dq-Frame current-control scheme, 345,    ␣␤-Frame, 91, 94, 98
       405                                 compensators, design, 223
  block diagram of, 345                    control strategy, feature, 164, 167
  implementation, 281                      current controllers, 192, 223
dq-Frame model, 101, 106, 107, 113,        Euler’s identity, 95
       114                                 power formulation, 95–96
  development, steps, 107                  representation, 111
  representation, 111–115                  signal generators/conditioners
  three-phase control system, 106                realization, 94
     applications, 106–107                 signal transformer, block diagram,
  transformation, 101                            179
                                           space-phasor phase shifter/scaler,
E                                                95
Electrical energy system, 81               system description, 98
Electronic power conditioning systems      three-phase signal generator, 95
  AC/DC/AC converter system, 4           αβ-Frame coordinate systems, 103
  back-to-back HVDC system, 4            abc-Frame signal transformer, 179
  HVDC rectiﬁer/inverter system, 4         block diagram, 179
Electronic switches, 4, 5                Frequency response method, 223
  characteristics, 5                     Full-bridge, single-phase, two-level
Euler’s identity, 95, 102                        voltage-sourced converter, 11
                                           schematic diagram, 11
F                                        Full-bridge voltage-sourced converter,
Faraday’s law, 415                               See H-bridge converter
Feed-forward compensation strategy,      Fully controllable switches, 6–8
       48, 50, 53–59, 254, 403             classiﬁcation, 6–8
Feed-forward control, 260                     bidirectional switch, 7–8
                                                               INDEX     443

     reverse-conducting switch, 7         ﬁlters, schematic diagram, 377
     unidirectional switch, 7             positive/negative-sequence, 83
                                        H-bridge converter, 10
G                                       High-voltage DC (HVDC) system,
Gain crossover frequency, 63, 64,               334, 338, 360–366, 369, 370,
        185, 196, 202, 214, 237, 256,           373–376
        327                               AC current waveforms, 371
Grid-connected mode, 269                  close-in asymmetrical fault, 345
Grid-connected voltage-sourced            controlled DC-voltage power port,
        converter system, 98, 106               342
Grid-imposed frequency, 262                  schematic diagram of, 342
  voltage-sourced converter system,       control system, 342
        160, 161, 204, 205                   DC-bus voltage regulation,
     αβ/dq-frame control, 204                   351–353
     structure, 160–161, 205–206             dq-frame current-control scheme,
                                                345–348
H                                            partial DC-side voltage
Half-bridge converter system, 10, 24,           equalization, 349
        25, 27, 30–32, 35, 36, 39,           phase-locked loop, 342–345
        47–57, 68, 116, 128, 131, 174        power-ﬂow control, 350–351
  AC/DC-side currents, 36                    PWM gating signal generator, 349
     power loss, 118                      converter system, 126, 127, 340
     transient behavior, 36               DC-bus voltage control, 371–384
  AC-side control model, 48–53            DC-bus voltage dynamics, 360–365
     block diagram, 53, 55                dq-frame current-control,
  AC-side terminal voltage, 116, 182            performance, 358–359
  closed-loop response, 51–53             line current, waveforms, 381, 382
  disturbance rejection, 57–59            low-order harmonics, generation of,
  dynamic response, 35, 56                      365–369
  equivalent circuit, 31, 32, 36          performance of, 345
  operation principles, 25–27             PLL performance, 357–358
     converter waveforms, 26–27           point of common coupling (PCC)
     pulse-width modulation, 25–26              voltages, 354–357, 382–383
  powers, 37                                 d/q-axis components, 383
     circuit diagram, 24, 39                 waveforms, 382, 383
     transient behavior, 37               power-ﬂow reversal, response,
  proportional-integral (PI)                    379
        compensator, 69                   real/reactive-power controller, 341
  schematic diagram, 49, 55                  schematic diagram of, 341
  start-up response, 53, 54               steady-state power-ﬂow, 369–371
  start-up transient, 53                  system parameters, 376
  switched model, 27                      system structure, 334–336
  voltage-sourced converter (VSC), 10     transmission systems, 3
  waveforms, 27                           voltage-sourced converter (VSC)
Harmonics, 328, 331, 376, 377                   system, 342, 376
444     INDEX


High-voltage switch cells, series,     Machine magnetizing current, 281–288
      127                              Machine magnetizing inductance, 293
                                       Mechanical switch, characteristics, 5
I                                      Modularity, deﬁnition, 12
Inertia constant, deﬁnition, 392       Modulating signals, 25, 226
Insulated-gate bipolar transistor       dynamic responses, 226
        (IGBT), 7, 26                   steady-state responses, 226
  reverse-conducting switches, 7       MOSFET, reverse-conducting
                                              switches, 7
L                                      Multi-input-multi-output (MIMO)
Laplace domain counterparts,                  system, 98, 254
        319                            Multilevel voltage-sourced converter
Laplace transform, 255, 352                   systems, 11–19
Lead compensator, 215                   capacitor-clamped, 16
Lead transfer function, 237             conﬁgurations, classiﬁcation, 14
Left-half complex plane (LHP), 203      diode-clamped, 16–18
Line-commutated converter, 8–9          H-bridge-based multilevel VSC, See
Line-to-neutral fault, 356                    Cascaded H-bridge multilevel
  interface transformer/grid,                 VSC
        schematic diagram of, 356          wye-connected, schematic
Load angle, 425                               diagram, 16
Load circuit, 265                      Multimodule voltage-sourced
Load voltage dynamic model, 250               converter, schematic diagram,
  block diagram, 250                          13, 14
Load voltage space phasor, loci, 254   Mutually coupled three-phase
Loop gain, 185, 256                           inductor, space-phasor
  magnitude, 258                              equations, 88
Low-order harmonics, 158–159, 365
  generation, 365–384                  N
Low-pass ﬁlter, 152, 296               Negative AC-side current, 29, 30, 44
                                         half-bridge converter waveforms,
M                                             29, 30
Machine current control, 296–299         nonideal half-bridge converter, 44
Machine electrical model, 414–418           switching waveforms, 44
  machine electrical torque, 418       Negative AC-side voltages, generation,
  rotor ﬂux space phasor, 417                 129–130
  stator ﬂux space phasor, 415–417     Nested control scheme, 125
  stator/rotor variables, 414          Neutral-point clamped (NPC), 128
  voltage/current equations, 415         diode-clamped converter, 17
Machine electrical power, 286, 301       midpoint current, 384
  waveforms, 287                         three-level half-bridge, 128
Machine electrical torque, 273, 418         positive AC-side voltages
Machine equivalent circuit, 418–421           generation, 128–129
  dynamic, 418–419                          negative AC-side voltages
  steady-state, 420–421                       generation, 129–130
                                                                  INDEX      445

Nonideal converter, 45, 46                  electrical model, 421–423
  analysis, 43–47                           electrical torque, 423
  averaged DC-side power, 45                space-phasor domain equivalent
  components, 45                                  circuit, 423
  DC-side terminal currents, 46             steady-state equivalent circuit,
  half-bridge converter, 38–47, 116               424–425
    AC-side terminal voltage, 116           three-phase, cross section of, 422
    analysis, 38–43                       Per-unit system, 389
    averaged equivalent circuit, 46, 47   Phase-locked loop (PLL) model,
    averaged model, 45–47                         210–212, 214–217, 342–345,
Nonideal two-level voltage-sourced                358, 399, 400
       converter, 116, 119                  compensator
  averaged equivalent circuit, 119             compensator design, 213–217
  power loss, 118                              transfer function, 326
  schematic diagram, 116                    function, 211
                                            response, 216–217
O                                           schematic diagram, 212, 343, 358
Odd triple-n harmonics, 141               Photovoltaic (PV) systems, 190, 234,
Open-circuit voltage, 407                         246
Open-loop frequency response, 258         Point of common coupling (PCC), 85,
Open-loop half-bridge converter, 51               347, 397
Overmodulation, 171                         shunt capacitors, 397
                                            voltage, 268, 328, 347, 354, 398
P                                              asymmetrical fault, 354
Partial DC-side voltage balancer,              phase voltage, 407
        186                                    responses, 268
  open/closed-loop frequency                   waveforms, 328
        responses, 186                    Positive AC-side current, 28, 30,
Partial DC-side voltage drift                     40
        phenomenon, 145–146                 half-bridge converter waveforms,
Partial DC-side voltage equalizer,                28, 30
        349                                 nonideal half-bridge converter, 40
  control block diagram, 349                   switching waveforms, 40
PCC voltage dynamics, 315–321             Positive AC-side voltages, generation,
  approximate model, 321–322                      128–129
  large-signal model, 315–317             Power balance principle, 122, 124,
  small-signal model, 318–320                     133, 361
  voltage control, 315                    Power efﬁciency, See Performance
Performance coefﬁcient, 388                       coefﬁcient
Permanent-magnet synchronous              Power-electronic converter system,
        machine (PMSM), 114,                      1–4, 8, 386, 387
        307–310, 421–425                    applications, 3–4
  d/q-axis current controller,              classiﬁcation, 8–9
        implementation, 310                    based on commutation process,
  dq-frame model, 109, 114                        8–9
446    INDEX


Power-electronic converter system           third-harmonic injection, 174,
        (Continued )                             231–232
     based on terminal voltage and          VSC, 171
        current waveforms, 9
  future roles, 3–4                       Q
  neutral-point clamped (NPC)             Q-axis current component, responses,
        converter, 1                             306
  parameters, 404                         Q-axis current controllers, 282, 309
  power circuit, 1                          implementation, 282
  uses, 4                                 Q-axis current-control loops, 299,
  voltage-sourced converter (VSC), 1             300
Power-electronic semiconductor              implementation, 300
        switches, See Electronic          Q-axis stator current, waveforms, 285
        switches
Power-electronic switch, 4–8              R
  classiﬁcation, 4–8                      Real/reactive-power controller,
     fully controllable switches,                161–181, 185–188, 189, 204,
        6–8                                      206–217, 222, 226–230, 232,
     semicontrollable switches, 6                262, 338
     uncontrollable switches, 5–6           AC-side dynamics, 229–231
  deﬁnition, 4                                 equivalent circuits, 230
Power maximization strategy, 396               space-phasor diagram, 228
Power point tracking strategy,              current-mode control, 165–168,
        graphical representation,                217–232
        392                                    block diagram, 165
Proportional-integral (PI)                     loop, 193
        compensator, 220, 257, 277,         DC-side voltage, 338
        322                                 dq-frame control, 219
12-pulse rectiﬁer system, 143               dynamic model, 163–165, 208–210
Pulse-width modulation (PWM)                dynamic performance, 166, 167,
        scheme, 10, 25–26, 130, 174,             222–223
        247, 348, 366, 368                  objective, 189
  modulating signals, 175, 177, 178,        schematic diagram, 179, 232
        189, 285, 383                       three-level NPC, 185–188
     d/q-axis components, 383             Rectifying mode of operation, 202
  operation principle, 174–178              DC-bus voltage controller, 202
  pulses generating mechanism,              instability, 202–203
        schematic diagram, 25             Reverse-conducting switch, 23
  schematic diagram of, 131, 348          Right-half complex plane (RHP), 195,
  signal generator, 146, 276, 281, 299,          203, 237
        310, 348                          Ripple components, frequency, 359
  strategy, 34, 376                       RLC ﬁlter, 246, 315
  switching frequency, 173, 202,          Root-locus method, advantage, 238
        368                               Rotating reference frame, 102
  switching harmonics, 167                Rotor circuit, 418
                                                                  INDEX     447

Rotor current-control loops, block          input-output relationship, 85
       diagrams, 298                      Space-phasor equation(s), 121, 164,
Rotor-ﬁeld coordinates, 274, 276, 277,            209, 248, 415
       308                                Space-phasor phase-shifter/scaler,
  machine dynamics, 276                           74–76, 78, 95, 96
  machine model, 274–277                    block diagram, 74, 75, 95, 96
  machine vector control, 277–278           output of, 77
  PMSM control, 308–310                     three-phase signal, amplitude/phase
Rotor-ﬂux observer, schematic                     changes, 76
       diagram, 276                       Space-phasor signal transformer,
Rotor permanent magnet, 422                       72
                                            abc-frame, 72
S                                         Squirrel-cage machine, 281
Second-order three-phase system, 108        asynchronous machine, 290, 294,
   dq-frame model, 108                            413, 419
   space-phasor equation, 108               induction machine, 297
Self-commutated converter, 9                magnetizing current, 281
Semi controllable switches, 6             Start-up transient, impact, 53
Series RL load, 250                       State-space equations, 86, 110
   dynamic model, 250–251                 Static compensator (STATCOM), 15,
Signal generator, 348                             142, 161, 206, 313, 314, 320,
   control block diagram of, 348                  324, 330, 332
   three-level NPC, 349                     AC-side currents, waveforms, 328
Silicon-controlled rectiﬁer (SCR), 6        AC voltage regulator control, block
Single-input-single-output (SISO), 278            diagram, 320, 322
   control loops, 256                       control, 322–324
Single-mass model, 389                      DC-bus voltage, 314, 322
Sinusoidal function, 70                     dq-frame current controller, 323
Snubber circuits, 127                          block diagram, 323
Space phasor, 69–71, 73, 81, 88, 91,        gating pulses, 330
         177, 417                           kernel, 313
   deﬁnition of, 70–72, 417                 line current, 331
   expression, 316                          model evaluation, 324–333
   αβ-frame representation, 91–94           operation mode, 193
      components, 93                        performance, 330
      αβ-frame to abc-frame signal          response, 332
         transformer, 93                    schematic diagram, 314
      αβ-frame to ab-frame signal           simpliﬁed simulation model, 324
         transformer, 92                    steady-state operating point,
   representation, 71, 177, 208                   320–321
      in complex plane, 177                 structure, 314–315
   three-phase function representation,   Static VAR compensator (SVC) units,
         70–82                                    3
   three-phase signal, properties, 73     Stationary-frame generalized
Space-phasor domain, 85, 86                       integrator, 166
448    INDEX


Stator current control, block diagram,   Third-order voltage harmonic, 157
        280                                zero-sequence harmonic, 157
Stator-ﬁeld coordinates, 288, 293        Three-level half-bridge neutral-point
  machine model, 288–293                         clamped (NPC) converter,
  machine vector control, 293–296                128–130, 132–134, 145, 146,
Stator-ﬂux model, block diagram, 295             174
Stator leakage factors, 419                AC-side terminal voltage, 134, 147,
Stator voltage, angular frequency, 424           174
Steady-state conditions, power-factor      averaged model, 135–136
        angle, 169                         circuit diagram, 129
Steady-state midpoint current, 143         PWM scheme, 130–133
Steady-state phasor model, 227             subcircuits, 130
Switch cell, 7, 128                        switched model, 133–134
  deﬁnition, 128                           switching functions, 132, 134, 147
  generic schematic diagram, 7           Three-level neutral-point clamped
  symbolic representations, 7                    (NPC) converter, 128,
Switched AC-side terminal voltage,               136–146, 152–155, 158, 158,
        133                                      160, 181, 185, 188–188, 219,
Switched DC-side terminal currents,              232, 340
        133–134                            AC-side currents, 139, 149, 157, 158
Switching frequency, 359                   AC-side terminal voltage, 153, 158
Switching signal, generation, 35              harmonic spectrum, 158
Symmetrical optimum method, 244,           block diagram, 137, 340
        257                                circuit structure, 136
Symmetrical three-phase AC machine         DC-side capacitors, 154
        model, 289                            voltages, 155
Symmetrical three-phase electric           DC-side midpoint, 138
        machine, 413                       DC-side voltages, 143–144
  space-phasor domain, 413, 419, 423          capacitive divider, 144–159
     dynamic model, 413                       equalizing scheme, block
     equivalent circuit, 419, 423                diagram, 184, 233
  structure, 413–414                          third-harmonic ripples, 188
Synchronization process, system            fundamental voltage, 159, 158
        response, 268                      midpoint current, 138–143, 188–189
Synchronous machine (SM), 109              modulating waveforms, 181
                                           operation principles, 136
T                                          power-factor angle, 139, 188
Tailing current process, 41                12-pulse diode rectiﬁer, 144
T-form model, See Air-gap ﬂux model        real/reactive-power controller,
Thevnin equivalent circuit, 303                  181–189, 232–234
Third-harmonic injected PWM                uniﬁed models, 153–155
        strategy, 175, 176, 178, 180,    Three-level neutral-point
        188, 303                                 diode-clamped converter
  advantage, 188                                 (DCC), 17
  modulating signal, 176                   schematic diagram, 18
                                                               INDEX     449

Three-phase circuit, 85, 229                 block diagram, 83, 87
  power-factor angle, 229                 time-domain equations, 84
  space-phasor state-space equations,   Three-phase voltage-sourced converter
        85                                      (VSC) system, 11, 96
Three-phase inductor, 192                 control, 69, 80
Three-phase inductor bank, 90             αβ-frame control scheme, block
  instantaneous power absorbed by,              diagram, 97
        90                                schematic diagram, 428
Three-phase linear system, 99             symbolic representation, 11
Three-phase signal, 76–88, 91, 94,      Three-wire three-phase systems,
        101, 107                                88–91
  amplitude change, 76                    power in, 88
  asymmetrical three-phase systems,     Three mutually coupled inductors, 100
        88                                space-phasor equations, 100–101
  controllable-amplitude/frequency      Thyristor-bridge converter, 9
        generation, 78–81                 current-sourced converter (CSC),
     block diagram, 79                          13, 15
  coupled symmetrical three-phase            schematic diagram, 15
        systems, 87–88                    line-commutated converter, 9
  decoupled symmetrical three-phase     Tip-speed ratio, deﬁnition, 388
        systems, 83–87                  Transfer function, 84
  dq-frame model, 105, 107              Transient switching processes, 8
     control in, 101–114                Two-dimensional frames, 69
     power formulation, 105               dq-frame, 69
     representation of space phasor,      αβ-frame, 69
        101–105                         Two-level half-bridge converter, 135
     systems representation, 107, 109   Two-level voltage-sourced converter
  αβ-frame representation, 91–101,              (VSC), 10, 115–119, 121–125,
        124                                     127, 153, 219
     asymmetrical three-phase             AC-side terminal real power, 122,
        systems, 100                            124
     control, 91, 96–98                   averaged equivalent circuit, 121
     dynamic equations, 94                circuit structure, 115–116
     signal generators/conditioners       control, 119–125
        realization, 94                   DC-side current, 153
     of space phasor, 91                  dq-frame model, 124–125
     symmetrical three-phase systems,        control, 125
        99                                   representation, 124
  frequency change, 78                    αβ-frame model, 121–123
  negative/positive-frequency, 79         models, 119–125
  phase angle change, 77                  operation principles, 116–118
  reversing phase sequence, 81            power loss, 118
  space-phasor representation, 82         schematic diagrams, 10
  symmetrical/decoupled/linear, 83,       uniﬁed models, 153–155
        87                                unit, 12
450    INDEX


U                                          block diagram, 75
Uncontrollable switches, 5–6               ﬂexible AC transmission system
Uniﬁed dynamic model, 191                        (FACTS) controllers, 74
Uninterruptible power supply (UPS)       Voltage drift phenomenon, 145,
       system, 245                               146
                                         Voltage harmonic, 157
V                                        Voltage-mode control, 162, 206,
Variable-frequency voltage-sourced               207
        converter system, 270–272,       Voltage model, 296
        304, 395–397, 405, 408, 410      Voltage regulation loop, 257
  activation of, 410                       compensator design, 257
  control, 273–310                       Voltage-sourced converter (VSC)
     inputs, 272                                 systems, 2, 9, 10–19, 73, 74,
  controlled DC-voltage power port,              126, 127, 154, 155, 160, 171,
        function, 395                            175, 205, 242, 278, 345, 367,
  exogenous (DC) system, 397                     378, 400, 402, 426
  power components, waveforms,             AC-side terminal voltage, 124, 168,
        307                                      170, 171, 176, 367
  response, 285, 304                          interface, 177
  structure, 270–272                          amplitude, 170
Variable-speed induction motor drive,      back-to-back HVDC system, 245,
        block diagram, 80                        335
Variable-speed wind-power system,             schematic diagram of, 335
        385–388, 390, 394                  basic conﬁgurations, 10–19
  classes of, 387                             multilevel VSC systems, 14–19
  maximum power extraction,                   multimodule VSC systems,
        390–393                                  11–14
  schematic diagram, 387, 394              block diagram, 123, 126, 154, 155
  unit, 126                                classiﬁcation, 125–126
Voltage control, 253–269                   converter, 154
  autonomous operation, 262                current-control loops, block
Vector-controlled doubly fed                     diagram, 165
        asynchronous machine, 294          current-control scheme, 219–223,
  control block diagram, 294                     347
Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO),       DC-bus voltage, 168
        212, 247                           DC-side capacitors, 242, 378
  input, 257                               d /q -axis current controllers, 249
Voltage-controlled real/reactive-power     dq-frame current controller,
        controller, 162, 206                     structure, 323
  schematic diagram, 162, 206              dynamic response, 180
Vector-controlled squirrel-cage            αβ-frame control, 272
        asynchronous machine, 277          gating signals, 260
  control block diagram, 277               interface reactor, 399
Voltage-controlled voltage-sourced         line current, 207, 370
        converter system, 74, 75              waveforms, 382
                                                               INDEX      451

  machine current control, 278–281     1.5 MW doubly fed asynchronous
  modules, AC-side voltages, 12              machine based, 403
  neutral-point clamped, 128           performance, 408
  objective, 246                       principle of operation, 387
  per-unit values, 426                 reactive-power ﬂow, 410
  PLL equivalent model, 400            real-power ﬂow, 409
  PLL implementation, 400              schematic diagram, 396, 398
  power rating, 299–307                start-up transient, 406
  PWM modulating signals, 174          synchronous speed response,
  response, 265–267, 306                     411
  schematic diagram, 263               wind turbine, 385
  supervisory control scheme, 263     Wind turbine, 385, 388–390
  switch cells, 199                    parameters, 403
  switching frequency, 347             performance-coefﬁcient vs .
  three-phase modulating signals,            tip-speed-ratio characteristic
       175                                   curve, 388
                                       power-speed characteristic,
W                                            388–390, 393
Wind-power system, 385, 387, 396,         curves, 390
       398, 401, 403, 405–411          torque, 391, 408
  AC/DC/AC converter system, 405
  components, 409                     Z
  controlled DC-voltage power port,   Zero real-power operating point,
       401, 405                              201
    schematic diagram, 401            Zero-sequence harmonics, 177
