                                              Impact on transient stability of self-synchronisation control
                                                  strategies in grid-forming VSC-based generators
                                            Régulo E. Ávila-Martíneza,b , Xavier Guillaudc , Javier Renedob , Luis Roucoa,b , Aurelio
                                                                     Garcia-Cerradaa,b , Lukas Sigrista,b
                                                a
                                                 Instituto de Investigación Tecnológica (IIT), C. del Rey Francisco, 4, 28008, Madrid, Spain
                                                  b
                                                    ETSI ICAI, Universidad Pontificia Comillas, Alberto Aguilera, 23, 28015, Madrid, Spain
                                            c
                                              Laboratoire d’Electrotechnique et d’Electronique de Puissance (L2EP), Ecole Centrale de Lille, Cité
                                                          Scientifique, CS 20048, Villeneuve d’Ascq, 59651, Hauts-de-France, France
arXiv:2509.04388v1 [eess.SY] 4 Sep 2025




                                          Abstract
                                          Voltage source converters with grid-forming control (GFM-VSC) are emerging as a solution
                                          for integrating renewable energy resources (RERs) into power systems. GFM-VSCs need
                                          a self-synchronisation strategy to ensure that all converters and generators in the power
                                          system are in synchronism and they reach the same frequency in steady state. The self-
                                          synchronisation strategy in GFM-VSCs that has received most attention in previous research
                                          is virtual synchronous machine (VSM) control scheme. However, no systematic study of the
                                          effects on transient stability of different variants of GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strate-
                                          gies has been carried out in previous work. This paper analyses and compares transient
                                          stability of four self-synchronisation strategies for Grid-forming voltage source converters
                                          (GFM-VSCs): VSM without phase-locked loop (PLL), VSM with PLL, VSM without PLL
                                          using wash-out filter and integral-proportional (IP) controller. The paper also analyses two
                                          different methods that can be applied to GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies to improve
                                          transient stability: the concept of virtual unsaturated active-power controller (VAPC), pro-
                                          posed in previous work, and an algorithm for frequency limitation in the GFM-VSCs (FLC),
                                          which is proposed in this paper.
                                          Keywords: Voltage source converter, VSC, grid forming, transient stability, frequency
                                          limiter controller.

                                              This is an unabridged draft of the following paper submitted to the International Journal
                                          of Electrical Power & Energy Systems on September 1st 2025:

                                             • R. E. Ávila-Martínez, X. Guillaud, J. Renedo, L. Rouco, A. Garcia-Cerrada, L. Sigrist,
                                               "Impact on transient stability of self-synchronisation control strategies in grid-forming
                                               VSC-based generators", submitted to the International Journal of Electrical Power &
                                               Energy Systems, pp. 1-36, September 2025.

                                             • Internal reference: IIT-25-279WP.
1. Introduction
Voltage source converters with grid-forming control (GFM-VSCs, for short) are emerging
as the preferred solution for integrating renewable energy resources (RERs) into power sys-
tems [1, 2, 3]. GFM-VSCs require self-synchronisation control strategies, whose main philos-
ophy is to mimic the behaviour of conventional synchronous machines. Self-synchronisation
strategies are necessary to ensure that all GFM-VSC converters and synchronous generators
in the system reach the same steady-state frequency [4]. Unlike for grid-following VSCs
(GFL-VSC), a phase-locked loop (PLL) is not required for synchronisation in GFM-VSCs,
and self-synchronisation strategies can be used instead.
    Previous studies have proposed several variants of self-synchronisation strategies in GFM-
VSCs, such as power synchronisation control [5], synchronverter control [6], virtual syn-
chronous machine (VSM) control [7, 8, 9], active-power/frequency (P-f) droop control [10],
integral-proportional (IP) controller [11], virtual oscillator [12, 13] and reactive-power-based
synchronisation [14], among others. Authors in [15] analysed some of those different self-
synchronisation strategies and proposed a variant to improve the dynamic response of the
GFM-VSC by using a lead/lag filter. Reference [16] analysed the performance of different
GFM-VSC self-synchronisation algorithms taking into account the primary energy source
of the GFM-VSC power converter, and the work proposes a novel control scheme taking
this aspect into account (so-called resource-aware grid-forming (RA-GFM)), improving the
performance of the system. A summary of GFM-VSC strategies (in this case applied to
high voltage direct current systems based on voltage source converters (VSC-HVDC)) can
be found in [17] and GFM-VSC control applied to VSC-HVDC systems has been analysed
in [18].
    VSM self-sycnhronisation control has attracted considerable attention in power systems
research and several variants have been described, including: VSM without phase-locked
loop (PLL) [7], VSM with PLL [8, 9] and VSM without PLL using a wash-out filter [19].
The work in [7] proved analytically that the known P-f-droop and VSM-without-PLL self-
synchronisation strategies are equivalent.
    It is essential to fully understand and ensure power system stability of power systems with
large amounts of power converters, including GFM-VSCs. Power system transient stability is
defined as large-disturbance angle stability and it is the ability of the generators of the system
to remain in synchronism and reach a new stable steady-state equilibrium point when subject
to large disturbances [20]. Although this phenomenon was originally related to conventional
synchronous machines, research publications during the past years have shown that loss-of-
synchronism phenomenon is also present in GFM-VSCs [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. Furthermore,
the work in [26] analysed the impact of GFM-VSC and GFL-VSC power converters on angle
stability under lager disturbances in large-scale power systems, concluding that the former
present better behaviour in terms of transient stability.
    Different publications have analysed the transient stability of power systems with GFM-
VSCs using different self-synchronisation strategies. Several studies [21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 32] used VSM without PLL control (or P-f droop control) while another [11] proposed
the IP controller. The latter study also proved the equivalence between the IP controller
and VSM-with-PLL scheme under small disturbances; however, the performance of the lat-
ter under large disturbances was not analysed. Reference [33] compared the performance

                                                2
of VSM-without-PLL and VSM-with-PLL schemes in terms of small-signal stability, but
transient-stability performance was not analysed. Furthermore, researchers in [29] proposed
the Transient Damping Method (TDM), a supplementary active-power set point (containing
a proportional gain and a wash-out filter) to improve transient stability. This study was
performed in VSM without PLL control. Although the configuration when using the TDM
is similar to self-synchronisation strategy VSM without PLL control + wash-out, it is not
exactly the same. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, previous publications have not
analysed the transient stability phenomenon in power systems with GFM-VSCs using VSM
without PLL and with washout as self-synchronisation strategy.
    Although the transient-stability performance of several GFM-VSC self-synchronisation
strategies has been studied separately, a comparison of each of them has not been carried out
in previous work. Hence, a comprehensive understanding of the transient-stability behaviour
and the advantages and disadvantages of each of these strategies has not yet been reached.
    This paper addresses this gap by providing a comprehensive analysis and comparison of
the transient-stability performance of different GFM-VSC self-synchronisation control strate-
gies, including VSM control (without and with PLL), VSM control without PLL and with
wash-out and the IP controller technique. It analyses the advantages, limitations and perfor-
mance characteristics of each self-synchronisation control strategy under different operating
conditions in terms of transient stability.
    A recent work [34] proposed the concept of virtual active-power control (VAPC) to im-
prove the transient-stability performance of GFM-VSCs using a variant self-synchronisation
strategy similar to VSM without PLL control, but with an additional degree of freedom.
Later studies [35, 36] applied the concept of VAPC to GFM-VSCs using IP-control. Fur-
thermore, reference [37] analysed transient stability of GFM-VSCs when using VSM without
PLL and VAPC, proving the effectiveness of VAPC concept when using different priorities
of d − q-axis currents in the current saturation algorithm of the power converter. However,
the concept of VAPC has not been applied to GFM-VSC strategies VSM - without PLL
or VSM - with washout explicitly in previous publications. Hence, questions that arise are
whether the concept of VAPC is effective when using different self-synchronisation strategies
and the comparison of the effectiveness of VAPC concept when using different GFM-VSC
strategies. This paper addresses this gap and analyses systematically the impact of VAPC
to the transient-stability performance of the most extended GFM-VSC self-synchronisation
strategies.
    The loss-of-synchronism phenomenon in GFM-VSCs occurs due to significant variations
of the angle of the modulated voltage of the GFM-VSC, producing, therefore, significant
variation on its frequency. Some methods applied to self-synchronisation strategies in GFM-
VSCs seek to prevent loss of synchronism, by limiting directly or indirectly the output
frequency of the GFM-VSC. The work in [11] proposed increasing the virtual inertia of the
converter during the fault to improve transient stability. The inertia increase is activated
when the current injection of the GFM-VSC reaches its limit. Reference [38] proposed an
adaptive P-f droop-based control method, which leads to an indirect limitation of the GFM-
VSC output frequency, preventing loss of synchronism. The additional adaptive P-f droop
term is introduced when the frequency of the GFM-VSC goes outside pre-defined limits.
Research studies in [39, 40, 41] proposed a scheme for active-power/frequency limitation
in GFM-VSCs, which consisted in limiting the active-power injection of the converter by

                                             3
changing its output frequency and limiting it with a saturator, improving both transient
stability and frequency stability. The active-power/frequency limitation process is triggered
when the active-power injection of the GFM-VSC goes outside its limits. Although main
application of the frequency-limitation method proposed in [39, 40] is frequency stability
and limiting the GFM-VSC active-power injection when subject to power imbalances, it also
helps to improve transient stability. The works in [42, 43] proposed a frequency freezing
strategy in GFM-VSCs to improve transient stability. When a the current injection of the
GFM-VSC reaches its limit, the output frequency of the GFM-VSC is freezed to the pre-
fault frequency, preventing loss of synchronism. Finally, the work in [44] and [45] proposed
a frequency saturation method in GFM-VSCs: a saturator is added to the output frequency
of the GFM-VSC, which is activated if the frequency goes outside pre-defined limits. The
work in [45] includes the additional condition that the derivative of the frequency has the
same sign than the frequency. The work in [45] proposes the frequency saturator to improve
transient stability explicitly, while the work in [44] just focus the study in fault-ride-through
(FRT) performance of the GFM-VSC, but the paper does not analyse loss-of-synchronism
phenomenon. Reference [45] proposes to tune the frequency limits of each GFM-VSC using
using data of the whole power system (e.g., virtual inertia of all the GFM-VSCs of the
system), to improve transient stability.
    While references [11, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45] clearly prove the potential of frequency-
limitation methods in GFM-VSCs to improve transient stability, there is still room for further
improvement. For example, references [11] and [38] limit the output frequency of the GFM-
VSC indirectly; further improvements in terms of transient stability could be achieved if the
output frequency of the GFM-VSC were limited directly during the fault. The work in [42, 43]
limits the output frequency of the GFM-VSC directly but it freezes the value to the pre-fault
frequency. It would be desirable to maintain the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation behaviour
as much as possible during the fault. Hence, a frequency saturator (as in [39, 40, 44, 45])
rather than a freezed frequency may be more practical. Regarding the activation of the
frequency limiter, in references [11, 42, 43] the frequency limitation process is activated
when the current injection of the GFM-VSC reaches its limit. Naturally, this occurs when
a fault close to the converter occurs. However, the current limit could also be reached due
to changes in the operating conditions or other disturbances, where the frequency limitation
process may not be desirable or needed. In [38, 44, 45], the frequency limitation process
is activated when the output frequency of the GFM-VSC reaches pre-defined limits, which
may not distinguish if the event is related to a transient-stability or a frequency-stability
issue. For example, if there is a power imbalance in the system the frequency of the centre of
inertia of the system, the bus frequencies and the frequencies of the GFM-VSCs will change,
but this does not necessarily mean that there is a transient stability issue: the frequencies of
all GFM-VSCs of the system may be in synchronism during the transient. In fact, frequency
excursions in a relatively small power system could be large due to power imbalances, but a
single GFM-VSC could loss synchronism caused by a nearby fault, and at this moment and
the frequency increment of the GFM-VSC could be much smaller than admissible frequency
limits of the power system and the frequency of the GFM-VSC will be different than the
frequencies of other generators, during the transient. The same issue occurs with the proposal
of [39, 40], which is activated when the active power injection of the GFM-VSC goes outside
its limits.

                                               4
    Motivated by these publications ([11, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45]), this paper proposes an
algorithm for internal frequency limitation in GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies to
improve transient stability (FLC, for short). In fact, some of the ideas of each strategy pro-
posed in previous work are combined in such way that the advantages some of the strategies
are used together, while some new features are also proposed here. Details will be provided
in Subsection 4.2. The frequency limiter proposed in this work (FLC) is applied directly
and it is only activated during the fault, which is detected with an voltage-based hysteresis
characteristic, ensuring an explicit limitation in the frequency imposed by the GFM-VSC. In
addition, the frequency limits are calculated around the pre-fault frequency, to avoid poten-
tial issues due to pre-fault steady-state frequency deviations. Hence, the proposed frequency
limiter has advantages from a practical point of view. Finally, the frequency-limitation
methods proposed in [11, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45] are analysed for particular GFM-VSC
self-synchronisation schemes, while this work analyses the proposed frequency limiter for
different GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies.
    Along the lines described above, the scientific contributions of this paper can be sum-
marised as follows:

   • Comprehensive analysis and comparison of transient-stability performance of different
     GFM-VSC self-synchronisation control strategies: VSM control without and with PLL,
     IP controller and the VSM control without PLL using a wash-out filter.

   • Analysis of the impact of the concept of VAPC to transient-stability performance of
     the the studied GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies.

   • Proposal of a simple but effective algorithm for frequency limitation (FLC) in self-
     synchronisation strategies in GFM-VSCs to improve transient stability.

   • Analysis the impact on transient stability of the wash-out-filter time constant in VSM-
     with-washout GFM-VSC strategy.

The analysis is carried out by ElectroMagnetic Transient (EMT) simulation in Matlab +
Simulink + SimPowerSystems, using detailed average-type EMT models of power converters,
including their controllers and operating limits.
    The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes modelling and control
aspects of GFM-VSCs, following the approach used in this paper. Section 3 presents the
GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies that will be analysed and compared in the paper.
Section 4 describes two methods to improve transient stability of GFM-VSCs, the concept
of VAPC and the frequency limiter (FLC) proposed in this paper. Section 5 presents a
theoretical analysis of transient-stability performance of the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation
strategies and the concepts of VAPC and FLC. The case study and simulation results are
presented in Section 6, including time-domain simulation and calculation of critical clearing
times (CCT). Section 7 presents the conclusions of the paper. Finally, data used in the paper
can be found in the Appendix.




                                              5
2. Modelling and control of GFM-VSCs
Fig. 1 shows the scheme of a GFM-VSC connected to an infinite grid. ēm is the modulated
voltage of the GFM-VSC, and z̄c = rc + jxc (xc = Lc ω) is its series connection impedance,
which includes its equivalent series reactor and the impedance of the connection transformer.
The infinite grid has a voltage v̄e,i and an equivalent impedance z̄g = rg + jxg . The voltage
at Point of Common Coupling (PCC) of the GFM-VSC is v̄g and the current and active-
and reactive-power injections of the GFM-VSC at the PCC are īg , pg and qg , respectively.


              pm , qm      rc    Lc      ig pg , qg r         Lg
                                                         g

                  +
                                              vg                      ve        Grid
             em             GFM-VSC




Figure 1: Equivalent model of a Grid-Forming Voltage Source Converter (GFM-VSC) connected to the grid.

    Fig. 2 shows a general scheme of the control system of a GFM-VSC (see [46, 35] for
example). This work uses a current-controlled GFM-VSC approach. The GFM-VSC con-
troller is based on vector control using a mobile d − q reference frame, where the modulated
voltage ēm is aligned with mobile d − q axes: em,d = em and em,q = 0. The GFM-VSC has a
constant set point for the magnitude of the modulated voltage (e0m ), and it uses a quasi-static
model to calculate the current set points (marked with (a) in Fig. 2), following the approach
of [19, 46, 35]:

                                ′     vg,d − e0m,d ref ′   e0m,q − vg,q
                           iref
                            g,q =                 , ig,d =              .                         (1)
                                           xcv                  xcv

where e0m,d = e0m and e0m,q = 0 and xcv = xc + xv is an equivalent virtual reactance used
for current-setpoint calculation. The equivalent virtual reactance (xcv ) contains the true (or
estimated) series reactance (xc ) and an additional virtual reactance (xv ). Notice that xv = 0
pu could be used, or xv > 0 pu if required to limit active-power variation in case of a phase
shift.
    A current controller is implemented ((b) in in Fig. 2) with Proportional-Integral (PI)
controllers and with a current limiter. Conventional Current Saturation Algorithm (CSA)
is used for current limitation [27]. The outputs of the current controller are the d − q set
points of the modulated voltage, which are the inputs of the voltage modulation process of
the GFM-VSC ((c) in Fig. 2).
    Finally, the angle (θ) used for Park’s transformation from d − q components to three-
phase signal is provided by the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategy ((d) in Fig. 2), which
will be described in the next section. Notice that the frequency imposed by the modulated
voltage of the GFM-VSC, ω, is the angular speed of the mobile d − q reference frame used
for vector control and it is determined by the self-synchronisation strategy.

                                                    6
                 (a) Cuasi-static model                (b) Current control
                   (Current set-points)                                                                           vg ,d
        em0 ,d                            i   ref '
                                                                             i   ref                                        emref,d      (c) Voltage modulation
  0                             1             g ,q                               g ,d
 em                            xcv
                                                                                                        CC ( s)

                 vg ,d                                igref,d '                                                                                                em,d                em,abc
                                                                                        ig , d                                               Max.
                                                                  Current
                                                                                                        Lc                               modulation
                                                                                                                                                                          P−1()
                 vg ,q                                            limiter                                                                   index
                                                      igref,q '                         ig , q          Lc                                                    em,q
                                                                                  ref                                         ref
                                1
                                                                              i   g ,q                                      e m ,q
 0                                            ref '
                                                                                                        CC ( s)                                 vdc
         0                     xcv
       e m ,q
                                          i   g ,d                                                                vg ,q
                                                                                                                  (d) Self-synchronisation strategy

                                                                                                                  pg0                    GFM-VSC                    b
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                self-synchronisation control
                                                                                                                                          strategy                    s
                                                                                                                   pg

                               Figure 2: General scheme of the control system of a GFM-VSC.



3. Self-synchronisation control strategies of GFM-VSCs
Fig. 3 shows the general scheme of a self-synchronisation control, where the GFM-VSC im-
poses its frequency according to a specific control algorithm, ensuring synchronism with
the rest of the system but maintaining its behaviour as a voltage source behind a series
impedance. The active-power setpoint (p0g ) is compared to the measured active-power in-
jection (pg ) and the error is the input of the self-synchronisation strategy. The outputs are
the frequency (ω, in pu) and angle (θ, in rad) of the modulated voltage of the GFM-VSC.
The latter is used for Park’s transformation (see Fig. 2). The angle δ is the angle of the
modulated voltage with respect to a synchronous reference frame.


                                     pg                                                              0, pu

                         pg0                                                                                                            b
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                         GFM-VSC
                                                                   self-synchronisation                                                      s
                                                                          control

                                                                                                                                           b                  
                                                                                                                                             s

                 Figure 3: General block diagram of a self-synchronisation control in GFM-VSCs.

      The objectives of GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies are as follows:

      • To produce synchronising effect and ensure that the GFM-VSC reaches the same fre-
        quency than the rest of the system in steady state.

      • When required, to produce an inertial response of the GFM-VSC.


                                                                                                 7
   • To control the dynamic response of the active- power injection of the GFM-VSC with
     sufficient damping, according to design specifications.
A primary frequency controller (or Primary Frequency Response, PFR) can also be included
to the GFM-VSC. Nevertheless, this controller is considered as a different part and it is not
included in the self-synchronisation strategy itself.
    Some of the most extended self-synchronisation strategies for GFM-VSCs will be analysed
in this work, namely:
   • Strategy 1: Virtual Synchronous Machine (VSM) without Phase-Locked Loop (PLL),
     hereinafter referred to as VSM-noPLL (see Fig. 4-(a)).
   • Strategy 2: VSM with PLL, referred to as VSM-PLL (see Fig. 4-(b)).
   • Strategy 3: VSM without PLL combined with a washout filter, referred to as VSM-
     Washout (see Fig. 4-(d)).
   • Strategy 4: Integral Proportional (IP) controller, referred to as IP control (see
     Fig. 4-(c)).
    Of the four self-synchronisation strategies, only strategy 1, VSM-noPLL (Fig. 4-(a)),
which is equivalent to P-f droop control, has an implicit frequency control mechanism. This
is because the inherent coupling between frequency dynamics and active power control allows
the system to naturally respond to frequency deviations without the need for an additional
control loop. In contrast, strategies 2, 3 and 4 (Fig. 4-(b)-(c)-(d)) decouple frequency and
active power dynamics by incorporating a PLL (or another type of frequency estimator), a
washout filter or a specific control structure, such as an IP controller. As a result, an external
frequency control loop may be required to ensure adequate frequency regulation. Therefore,
an explicit frequency control loop consisting of a proportional gain (KP F R ), a low-pass filter
with a time constant (TP F R ) and a saturation limit (∆pmax g  ) is implemented in these cases.
In Fig. 4, ωb is the nominal frequency in rad/s.
    The details of each GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategy are provided in next subsec-
tions.

3.1. Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL
    Fig. 4-(a) shows the block diagram of the VSM without PLL. In this strategy, the GFM-
VSC mimics the behaviour of a synchronous generator and it imposes its frequency according
to the swing equation GFM-VSC [7, 28].
    The main characteristics of VSM-noPLL are as follows:
   • The GFM-VSC provides an inertial response, due to the emulated inertia constant
     HGF M (s).
   • The damping factor coefficient, DGF M , plays two roles simultaneously: (a) to provide
     damping and (b) to contribute to an instantaneous primary frequency response. Notice
     that it is mandatory that the primary frequency support is instantaneous, because,
     otherwise, the dynamic response of the GFM-VSC could be jeopardised. Notice also
     that if a typical value for the proportional gain of the frequency controller is used (e.g.
     DGF M = 20 pu), then the dynamic response of the GFM-VSC is determined.

                                                8
                                                                                                                             pg                DGFM                           g ,PLL

                pg                                                                                  pg0       p*g
                                                                                                                                                  1                    b         
        0                                                                                                                                     2 sH GFM
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                         s
  p     g                                   1                                    b                       pgref ,PFR
                                         2sH GFM                                  s
                                                                                                                    pgmax

                                      DGFM                                0, pu
                                                                                                                                   − K PFR
                                                                                                                                                                         0, pu
                                                                                                                                  1 + sTPFR
                                                      Primary frequency response                                      −pgmax                            Primary frequency response




                          (a) Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL.                                                                    (b) Strategy 2: VSM-PLL

                                                                                                                             pg

                                                     sTWD
                               pg    DGFM                                      0, pu                                              KP
                                                   1 + sTWD
                                                                                                    pg0         p*g                                                              
  pg0           p*g
                                                                                                                                      1                                b
                                                    1                    b            
                                                                                                                                  2 sH GFM                              s
                                                2 sH GFM                   s                               pgref ,PFR
            pgref ,PFR
                                                                                                                      pgmax
                      pgmax
                                                                                                                                      − K PFR
                                     − K PFR                                                                                                                                 0, pu
                                                                           0, pu                                                    1 + sTPFR
                                    1 + sTPFR
                                                                                                                        −pgmax
                      −pgmax                              Primary frequency response                                                                     Primary frequency response



                  (c) Strategy 3: VSM-Washout.                                                                         (d) Strategy 4: IP control.

Figure 4: Different self-synchronisation control strategies in GFM-VSCs with primary frequency response
(PFR) control.


3.2. Strategy 2: VSM-PLL
    Fig. 4-(b) shows the block diagram of the VSM with PLL, equipped with PFR control.
In this strategy, the GFM-VSC imposes its frequency according to the swing equation, but
using a PLL to estimate the frequency at the PCC [8, 47]. Then, the difference between the
frequency of the GFM-VSC and the estimated frequency of the grid at the PCC is multiplied
by the damping coefficient DGF M . The block diagram of the PLL equipped, which includes
an anti-windup method, is shown in Fig. 5. Notice that, although this GFM-VSC self-
synchronisation scheme uses a PLL, the application is totally different to the use of a PLL
in grid-following converters. Here is only used to estimate the frequency of the grid and to
be used in the self-synchronisation strategy.
    The main characteristics of VSM-PLL are as follows

        • The GFM-VSC needs an estimation of the frequency at the AC connection point, using
          a PLL.

        • The GFM-VSC provides an inertial response, due to the emulated inertia constant
          HGF M (s).

        • The damping coefficient, DGF M , is used to obtain the required damping ratio of the
          dynamic response of the GFM-VSC.


                                                                                                9
   • The controller of the primary frequency response of the GFM-VSC is decoupled from
     the power control. For example, the PFR control can be made as slow as required
     (time constant TP F R ), without jeopardising the synchronising properties of the strategy.
     Notice also, that if primary frequency controller is not used (e.g. KP F R = 0 pu), the
     GFM-VSC controls its active-power injection to a constant value (e.g. pg = p0g ).


                                                                                        0, pu
                                               K P,PLL
                       =0                                                       PLL
                                                                                  max
                                                                                              g ,PLL ,i
                 ref
             v   gq
                                                                       -1
                             _
                                     K I,PLL             1                  −PLL
                                                                               max


                             vgq                         s                  _

                                                                   Anti-
                                                                  Windup




                            Figure 5: PLL block diagram equipped with an anti-windup.




3.3. Strategy 3: VSM-Washout
    Fig. 4-(c) shows the scheme of the VSM without PLL, but incorporating a wash-out filter
with a time constant TW D [19, 48]. This high-pass filter remains inactive during steady states
but it acts during the transient.
    The main characteristics of VSM-Washout are as follows:
   • The GFM-VSC does not use a PLL.
   • The GFM-VSC provides an inertial response, due to the emulated inertia constant
     HGF M (s).
   • The damping coefficient, DGF M , is used to obtain the required damping ratio of the
     dynamic response of the GFM-VSC.
   • The primary frequency controller of the GFM-VSC is decoupled from the power control,
     due to the washout filter.

3.4. Strategy 4: IP control
    The IP controller is another approach for controlling GFM-VSC power converters de-
scribed in [11]. This type of controller adds a proportional action (KP ) to the active power
to provide damping, as shown in Fig. 4-(d).
    The main characteristics of IP control are as follows:
   • The GFM-VSC does not require an estimation of the frequency at the AC connection
     point.
   • The GFM-VSC provides an inertial response, due to the emulated inertia constant
     HGF M (s).

                                                             10
   • The proportional gain, KP , is used to obtain the required damping ratio of the dynamic
     response of the GFM-VSC.
   • The primary frequency controller of the GFM-VSC is decoupled from the self-synchronisation
     control. Then an external control loop for PFR support can be added to the GFM-VSC
     control (Fig. 4 (c)).
   • As will be explained in Section 3.5, the behaviour of IP controller under small distur-
     bances is equivalent to the behaviour of VSM-PLL strategy [11].

3.5. Design of self-synchronisation strategies
Parameters of the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategy will be designed as follows:
   • To obtain a dynamic response of the GFM-VSC with the required characteristics.
   • When possible, the PFR controller is designed separately, using a typical values for the
     proportional gain.
The analysis is based on the one carried out in previous work [11, 2] and the details are
omitted in this paper.
   The system of Fig. 1 is considered. Firstly, a GFM-VSC with VSM-PLL is considered.
The PFR controller is assumed to be slow and it is neglected from the analysis. It can be
shown that, under small disturbances, the transfer function between the active-power set
point and output of the GFM-VSC (T(s) = pg /p∗g ) can be written as [11, 2]:
                                                         
                                                      ωb
                              pg (s)           2HGF M xc
                       T (s) = ∗     =      D GF M s+         ωb                          (2)
                              pg (s)   s2 +  2HGF M        2HGF M xc

Hence, the damping ratio, ζ, and the natural frequency, ωn , are given by:
                                                  r
                                DGF M 1                 ωb
                           ζ=            , ωn =                 .                         (3)
                               4HGF M ωn            2HGF M xc
There are two equations (3) and four parameters (HGF M , DGF M , ζ and ωn ).
    In the case of VSM-noPLL strategy, under the assumption that the estimated frequency at
the PCC is similar to the frequency of the infinite grid, which is an approximation assuming a
strong grid, Eq. (3) also holds. In the case of VSM-Washout strategy, the same approximation
is made plus the approximation that the wash-out filter has low effect and it is neglected.
This is only true if the wash-out time constant (TW D ) is high enough. Then, Eq. (3) can
also be used. Further considerations about the design aspects and the wash-out-filter time
constant in VSM-Washout are described in Subsection 3.6.
    The work in [11] proved the equivalence between VSM-PLL and IP control, with where
DGF M = 2HGF M KP ωb /xc . Therefore, in IP control the damping ratio and natural frequency
are related to the control parameters as follows [11]:
                                 r                         r
                                      2xc                         ωb
                         KP = ζ                 and ωn =                .                  (4)
                                    HGF M ωb                  2HGF M xc
   Therefore, the design of GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies used in this work is as
summarised in Table 1.

                                             11
                    Table 1: Design of GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies.


                                        Specified                   Calculated
            Strategy
                                          values                      values
                                     HGF M , DGF M
                                     PFR (implicit):
            Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL                               ζ and ωn , with (3)
                                     KP F R = DGF M
                                      TP F R = 0 s
                                        HGF M , ζ
            Strategy 2: VSM-PLL                            DGF M and ωn , with with (3)
                                    PFR: KP F R , TP F R
                                        HGF M , ζ
            Strategy 3: VSM-Washout PFR: KP F R , TP F R     DGF M and ωn , with (3)
                                     Wash-out: TW D
                                        HGF M , ζ
            Strategy 4: IP control                             KP and ωn , with (4)
                                    PFR: KP F R , TP F R



3.6. Design of self-synchronisation strategies - Specific aspects of Strategy 3 (VSM-Washout)
As described previously, Strategy 3 (VSM-Washout), Eq. (3) and Table 1 could also be used
for the design, taking into account small-signal stability aspects and using the assumption
that the wash-out-filter (TW D ) is high enough. Nevertheless, in Strategy 3 (VSM-Washout),
transient-stability behaviour should be also taken into account. In previous work, the de-
sign of the wash-out filter time constant in strategy VSM-Washout has not been addressed
explicitly. However, reference [49] has analysed the impact of the wash-out filter in the
so-called transient damping method (TDM), and conclusions can be applied directly to the
VSM-Washout strategy. The work in [49] proposes a curve for feasible regions of parame-
ters DGF M and TW D , in terms of transient stability. Mainly,in order to use high values of
DGF M , the wash-out filter time constant should be high enough, concluding that TW D ≥ 1
s could be a reasonable value, for the test system analysed. In addition, in Strategy 3 the
wash-out filter adds a state variable and the closed-loop system dynamics is more complex
and it is not a second-order system any more. However, this aspect can be addressed by
using a high enough value of TW D and it is recommended to check the results of the design
by time-domain simulation. Obviously, the wash-out filter time constant TW D should not be
excessively high, because it would not be able to avoid active-power changes under frequency
offsets, which is its role.




                                                12
4. Methods to improve transient stability
This paper also analyses two methods to improve transient stability in GFM-VSCs, which
could be applied to all GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies of Section 3:
   • Virtual active power control (VAPC), proposed in previous work [34].
   • A frequency limiter for GFM-VSC control (FLC), proposed in this paper.

4.1. Virtual active power control (VAPC)
The virtual active power control (VAPC) was proposed in [34] to improve transient stability
in GFM-VSCs. In VAPC, the GFM-VSC uses as feedback signal of the self-synchronisation
mechanism the unsaturated virtual active power, pvirt g , instead of the measured active power
injection, as shown in Fig. 6. Notice that VAPC is compatible with any self-synchronisation
mechanism in GFM-VSCs.
    The unsaturated virtual active power used in VAPC (pvirt        g in Fig. 6) is calculated as
follows:                                            ′
                                                              ref ′
                                pvirt
                                  g   = vg,d · iref
                                                g,d + vg,q · ig,q                             (5)
                                                                         ′        ′
                                                           g,d and ig,q are the unsaturated
where vg,d and vg,q are the voltage components at PCC and iref      ref

current set points.
   All details and analysis of VAPC control can be found in [34].

                        pgvirt                              0, pu

                 pg0                                                      b       
                                          GFM-VSC
                                    self-synchronisation                     s
                                           control

                                                                             b       
                                                                             s

Figure 6: General block diagram of a self-synchronisation control in GFM-VSCs using the virtual active
power pvirt
       g    as a feedback measurement.


4.2. Proposed frequency limiter control (FLC)
In this Section, a frequency limiter (FLC) in GFM-VSCs is proposed to improve transient
stability. The proposed frequency limiter was motivated by previous work in [11, 38, 39, 40,
42, 43, 44, 45], but it introduces new features to improve its performance, as discussed in
Section 1. The proposed frequency limiter in GFM-VSCs: (a) is aimed to improve transient
stability, (b) it is activated during when a fault is detected, by looking to the terminal voltage
and using a hysteresis characteristic, and (c) it includes a frequency saturator around the
pre-fault steady-state frequency.
    Fig. 7 shows the block diagram of the proposed algorithm for frequency limitation in
GFM-VSCs to improve transient stability. The proposed frequency limiter consists of the
following elements:

                                                           13
   • Fault Detection: It is performed with a hysteresis characteristic:

          – A binary variable γ1 is used, which is set to 1 upon detection of a voltage decrease
            with a hysteresis, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
          – If vg ≤ vA (fault detected), then γ1 = 1 and remains at 1 until vg > vB . If a fault
            is not detected, γ1 = 0.

   • Frequency Saturator: It is activated only when the fault is detected, limiting the
     frequency if it exceeds a specific threshold: ω max , ω min .

   • Anti-Windup mechanism: When the frequency saturates, it resets the integral part of
     the self-synchronisation mechanism (i.e., the integral of the virtual inertia).


                                                       Anti-Windup
                                                       Integral reset
                              pg

                     pg0                                 GFM-VSC
                                                   self-synchronisation
                                                                                                   max   
                                                          control
                                                                                           min

                                                         Fault-detection

                                              1
                                               1
                               vg
                                                       v A vB           1
                                                                            vg ( pu )


         Figure 7: Proposed frequency limiter applied in GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies.

The frequency limits of the proposed current-limitation algorithm is given by:

                                 ω max = ω steady−state + ∆ω max
                                                                                                              (6)
                                       min         steady−state                         max
                                   ω         = ω                            − ∆ω

where:
   • ω max is the maximum saturated frequency.

   • ω min is the minimum saturated frequency.

   • ω steady−state is the unsaturated frequency of the converter in steady-state before the
     fault. Notice that the steady-state pre-fault frequency is used here, to avoid dependency
     on steady-state frequency deviations in the system.

   • ∆ω max is the maximum increment of the frequency of the GFM-VSC. This parameter
     should be designed (e.g. ∆ω max = 0.005 pu, for example).


                                                             14
5. Theoretical analysis
This section presents a theoretical analysis on the impact on transient stability of self-
synchronisation strategies in GFM-VSCs, the concept of virtual active power control (VAPC)
and the proposed frequency limiter for GFM-VSCs. Active power - angle (P − δ) curves are
used for the analysis, following the guidelines used in previous work [27, 25, 34, 30, 29, 32, 50].
In synchronous machines, Equal Area Criterion (EAC) is used for the theoretical transient
stability analysis [51, 52]. However, although the EAC could provide some qualitative insight
of transient-stability behaviour of GFM-VSC power converters, it cannot be applied directly
to GFM-VSCs, as shown in [53]. This is mainly due to the fact that the high damping
coefficient used in GFM-VSCs is much higher than the one in synchronous machines. This
implies that, after the fault clearing, the angle of the GFM-VSC increases much less than
the rotor angle in synchronous machines, as illustrated in [3].
    Hence, the key aspects taken into account for the theoretical analysis are as follows:

   • P − δ curves: The larger is the P − δ curves, the larger is transient-stability margin
     of the GFM-VSC and this will result in a higher critical clearing time (CCT) of the
     fault, as shown in previous work [27, 25, 34, 30, 29, 32, 50].

   • Structure and differential equation of the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategy and
     methods to improve transient stability: if a fault occurs, the best results in terms
     of transient stability are obtained with strategies in which the frequency and angle
     increase less, during the fault and after the fault clearing. This depends on each
     stategy.

    A GFM-VSC is connected to an infinite grid, as shown in Fig. 8. It is assumed that
the external grid is strong (xg low) and the series resistances are neglected, for illustrative
purposes. The control system of the GFM-VSC is as the one described in Fig. 2 of Section 2,
where the virtual impedance of the quasi-static model is assumed to be zero (xv = 0), hence
xcv = xc . A conventional Current Saturation Algorithm (CSA) is used for current limitation
of the GFM-VSC, with equal priority to d- and q-axis current injections. The magnitude of
modulated voltage of the GFM-VSC is assumed to be constant for the analysis (em = e0m ).


                              pm , qm           pg , qg           pe , qe
                                         jxc              jxg
                                               ig
                 em = em                                                  ve = ve 0º
                                                     vg




                          Figure 8: GFM-VSC connected to an infinite grid.




                                                    15
    The active power injection of the GFM-VSC, when the current limit has not been reached,
reads:
                                                     em ve
                                         pg = pe =           sin δ                           (7)
                                                       xtot
where δ is the angle of the modulated voltage of the GFM-VSC (with respect to the external
grid) and xtot = xc + xg .
    A three-phase-to-ground short circuit is applied at bus e at a certain time tf (for illus-
trative purposes) and it is cleared at a certain time tcl . When the fault is cleared, the angle
of the modulated voltage of the GFM-VSC is called δcl . When the fault occurs, ve = 0 and,
therefore, the active-power injection of the GFM-VSC goes to zero too: pg = 0.
    When the GFM-VSC has current limiter CL-CSA, the active-power injection of the GFM-
VSC is given by [34, 35]:
                                     e0m ve
                                                              if δ < δa (ig < imax
                       
                       
                                     xtot
                                            sin δ,                                g    )
                  pg =                                                                       (8)
                                 e0m ve sin δ
                        √                         · i max
                                                           ,  if   δ ≥ δ   (i  = i max
                                                                                       )
                       
                               0 2    2     0          g                 a   g     g
                            (em ) +ve −2em ve cos δ

where δa is the angle at which the current injection of the GFM-VSC reaches its current
limit (ig = imax
             g   ).




                          Figure 9: GFM-VSC with CL-CSA: P − δ curve.


    Fig. 9 shows the the P − δ curve of the GFM-VSC with current limiter CL-CSA. The
P − δ curve of the GFM-VSC without current limiter is also represented (dashed line in
yellow), for comparison purposes. In the initial operating point: δ = δ0 and pg = p0g . Angle
δcl is defined as the angle when the fault is cleared. Without CL, the P − δ curve of the
GFM-VSC is a sinusoidal curve, given by (7), where the maximum active-power injection
is pmax1
     g     = e0m ve /xtot . When the GFM-VSC has CL-CSA, the are of the P − δ curve is

                                                      16
reduced dramatically and the maximum active-power injection of the GFM-VSC is given by
pmax2
 g     = e0m ve sin(δa )/xtot < pmax1
                                 g    .
    The larger is the P − δ, the larger will be the critical angle δclcrit (the maximum angle
that can take place before clearing the short circuit, without provoking loss of synchronism
of the GFM-VSC) and the larger will be CCT. It is well-known that when the GFM-VSC is
equipped with current limiter CL-CSA, its transient-stability margin is reduced, as can be
observed in Fig. 9 (see [34] for further details).
    However, the CCT depends on the P − δ curve but also depends on the particular
self-synchronisation strategy used in GFM-VSC control (Fig. 3 of Section 3). Specifically,
the CCT can be obtained (sometimes analytically and sometimes numerically) using the
swing equation of the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategy and imposing the condition
that the frequency of the GFM-VSC can be recovered to its pre-fault value, after the fault
clearing [25].

5.1. GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies
    A qualitative analysis of GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies of Section 3 (see Fig. 4)
is presented in this subsection. For the analysis, it is assumed that the frequency controller
of GFM-VSC is slow and it has low impact on transient stability; therefore, it is neglected
for simplicfication purposes. Naturally, in the only case that the frequency controller is
considered is in the case of VSM without PLL, because it this case the damping term plays
also the role of an instantaneous primary frequency response (PFR) term and it cannot
be neglected. The evolution of the frequency and angle of the modulated voltage of the
GFM-VSC will be analysed in a qualitative way, and the CCT of each self-synchronisation
strategy will be discussed. Notice that an analytical formula of the critical angle and the
CCT cannot be obtained when considering the P − δ characteristic of the GFM-VSC with
CL-CSA (8) and the different differential equations of the self-synchronisation strategies
(swing equations). However, useful insight can be obtained by means of qualitative analysis
and numerical simulation.

5.2. Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL
    In the VSM without PLL scheme (Fig. 4-(a)), when a fault occurs, the active-power
injection of the GFM-VSC goes to zero and the differential equation (swing equation) of this
self-synchronisation strategy reads:
                                  dω                                 0
                         2HGF M      + DGF M (ω − ω0,pu ) = p0g − 
                                                                  p
                                                                   g
                                                                   >                       (9)
                                  dt
Therefore, the derivative of the frequency of the GFM-VSC during the fault is given by:
                          dω     1
                             =        [p0g − DGF M (ω − ω0,pu )]                          (10)
                          dt   2HGF M
Clearly, high values of the emulated inertia constant (HGF M ) and the damping coefficient
(DGF M ) prevent loss of synchronism, because they reduce acceleration of the frequency of
the GFM-VSC and, therefore, the increase of the angle of the modulated voltage of the
GFM-VSC (δ) is also reduced. As a consequence, high values of HGF M and DGF M increase

                                              17
the critical clearing angle (δclcrit ) and the CCT. However, this strategy has a limitation:
since the damping coefficient DGF M plays two roles at the same time: the damping term
and the instantaneous primary frequency controller, typical values for primary frequency
control gains should be used (DGF M = 20 − 25 pu), and not higher. This aspects limits the
performance of the GFM-VSC in terms of transient stability.

5.3. Strategy 2: VSM-PLL
    In the VSM with PLL scheme (Fig. 4-(b)), when a fault occurs, the swing equation of
the GFM-VSC is given by:
                                dω                                    0
                       2HGF M      + DGF M (ω − ω̃g,P LL ) = p0g − 
                                                                   p
                                                                    g
                                                                    >                    (11)
                                dt
Assuming that the grid is strong (xg low), the estimated frequency at the connection point
by the PLL is similar to the nominal frequency: ω̃g,P LL ≈ ω0,pu . Therefore, the behaviour
of the VSM-PLL strategy is the same as that of the VSM scheme without PLL (given by
equations (9) and (10)). However, there is an important difference, in the VSM-PLL scheme,
the damping term (with damping coefficient DGF M ) is decoupled from the primary frequency
controller. Hence, the damping coefficient could be much higher (e.g., DGF M = 100−300 pu).
This prevents loss of synchronism, since, during the fault, the increase of the frequency and
the angle of the GFM-VSC is much lower is much lower than then one obtained with the
VSM-noPLL strategy. Thus, the CCT achieved with the VSM-PLL strategy is expected to
be higher than then one obtained with the VSM-noPLL strategy.

5.4. Strategy 3: VSM-Washout
    In the VSM without PLL + wash-out filter scheme (Fig. 4-(c)), the damping term and
the frequency controller are also decoupled. Hence, a high value of the damping coefficient
can be used (DGF M = 100 − 300 pu). For the analysis, the wash-out filter is neglected:
sTW D /(1 + sTW D ) ≈ 1. Therefore, the CCT obtained when using strategy VSM-Washout is
expected to be very similar to the one obtained when using strategy VSM-PLL. This is only
true if the wash-out filter time constant (TW D ) is high enough.

5.5. Strategy 4: IP Control
    In the IP control scheme (Fig. 4-(d)), when a fault occurs, the swing equation of the
GFM-VSC (in the Laplace domain) is given by:
                                1               0        0
                                     (p0g − g ) − KP 
                                            p
                                             >         g = ω
                                                      p
                                                       >                                 (12)
                             2sHGF M
Hence,
                                      dω        1
                                          =         p0g                                   (13)
                                       dt    2HGF M
This means that the frequency increase during the fault when using IP control is higher than
the one obtained in VSM with PLL. This is not trivial, since the behaviour of strategies VSM-
PLL and IP control are equivalent under small disturbances, if they are properly tuned (see
Section 3.5). Nevertheless, transient-stability behaviour is different when using IP control

                                             18
and the reason is that during the fault the active-power injection of the (pg ) goes to zero
and this produces a higher acceleration of the frequency, according to the block diagram of
this control strategy (Fig. 4-(d)). Therefore, the CCT obtained with IP control is expected
to the lower than the one obtained with strategy VSM with PLL.

5.5.1. Conclusion
    According to the theoretical analysis, the highest CCTs are achieved with strategies
VSM-PLL and VSM-Washout. The CCT obtained with the strategy of VSM without PLL
is expected to be lower, due to the fact that it has a lower value of the damping coefficient
(DGF M = 20 − 25 pu), because the damping term also plays the role of primary frequency
controller. The CCT with IP control is expected to the lower than the one obtained with
strategies VSM-PLL and VSM-Washout, because during the fault the active-power injection
of the (pg ) goes to zero and this produces a higher acceleration of the frequency in the former,
due to its block diagram. Qualitative analysis cannot provide conclusions about which CCT
is higher: with VSM-noPLL or with IP control. If the the IP control is tuned to have a
high damping ratio, it is expected to have a better performance than when using strategy
VSM without PLL, due to the behaviour of the GFM-VSC after the fault clearing. However,
which of these two strategies will have higher CCTs would depend on the control tuning and
scenarios considered.

5.6. Virtual active-power control (VAPC)
    When using VAPC (Fig. 6 of Section 4.1), the unsaturated virtual active power, pvirt  g ,
is used as feedback signal in the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategy. This means that
transient stability behaviour of the GFM-VSC is driven by P − δ curves using pvirt  g , inde-
pendently that that current limit is reached [34], which is precisely the advantage of VAPC.
The unsaturated virtual active-power injection of the GFM-VSC, as a function of the angle
of its modulated voltage is given by [34, 35]:
                                     e0m ve
                             
                             
                                   xc +xg
                                            sin δ,     if δ < δa (ig < imax
                                                                        g   )
                       virt
                      pg =                                                               (14)
                                    e0m ve
                                              sin δ, , if δ ≥ δa (ig = ig )
                                                                        max
                             
                             
                                xc +xg /KCL

where δa is the angle when the current injection of the GFM-VSC reaches its current limit
(ig = imax
       g   ), and the term KCL is defined as:
                                                               ′
                                                       īref
                                                         g
                                   KCL = KCL (δ) =                                             (15)
                                                       īref
                                                         g

           ′       ′        ′
where īref
          g        g,d + jig,q is the unsaturated current reference (before current limitation)
               = iref        ref

and īref
      g
               ref
                       g,q is the saturated current reference (after current limitation) (see Fig. 2
            = ig,d + jiref
of Section 2). Since the GFM-VSC has a CL-CSA current limiter with equal priority to d-
                                        ′
and q-axis current injections, īref g    and īref
                                                g   have the same phase; therefore, KCL is a real
number. Notice also that KCL ≥ 1 always.



                                                19
      Figure 10: GFM-VSC with Virtual active power control (VAPC) and CL-CSA: P − δ curve.



   Fig. 10 shows the the P − δ curve of the unsaturated virtual active-power injection of
the GFM-VSC (pvirt g ), when using VAPC and current limiter CL-CSA [34, 35]. It is clear
from Fig. 10 that with VAPC the P − δ curve is larger than the ones obtained with GFM-
VSC without CL and with CL-CSA. Therefore, the CCT obtained with VAPC will be much
higher that the ones obtained without VAPC (without CL and with CL-CSA). This is because
when the current injection of the GFM-VSC reaches its current limit, the denominator of
the sinusoidal expression of pvirt
                              g    (14) has a lower reactance: xc + xg /KCL with KCL ≥ 1, as
explained in [34, 35].
   As a conclusion, with VAPC the CCT of the fault can be increased significantly and
VAPC can be applied to all GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies of Section 3.

5.7. Proposed frequency limiter
    The frequency limiter for GFM-VSCs proposed in Section 4.2 is analysed now, using the
P −δ curves of Fig. 9. The critical clearing angle (δclcrit ) is independent of the GFM-VSC self-
synchronisation strategy used and it depends only on the P −δ curve. However, the proposed
frequency limiter will have an impact on the behaviour of the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation
strategy and, therefore, on the CCT of the fault. With then proposed frequency limiter, the
derivative of the frequency imposed by the GFM-VSC will be given by:
                      = GFM-VSC self-sync. strategy, if ω min < ω < ω max .
                   
               dω 
                                    ≥ 0,                       if     ω = ω min .           (16)
               dt 
                                    ≤ 0,                       if     ω = ω max .
It is clear that if the frequency is limited, the critical clearing angle will be reached later
(δclcrit ) and, therefore, the CCT of the fault will increase significantly. Furthermore, the
proposed frequency limiter can be applied to all GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies
of Section 3.

                                               20
6. Case study and results
A 100 MVA GFM-VSC-based generator connected to an infinite grid is considered, as shown
in Fig. 11. Data of the system can be found in the Appendix. Simulations were carried out
with VSC_Lib tool, an open-source tool based on Matlab + Simulink + SimPowerSystems
developed by L2EP-LILLE in Migrate project [54, 55, 56].



                                  1                2                   3



                                                                           Grid
                 GFM-VSC

                        Figure 11: GFM-VSC connected to an infinite bus.



    Transient-stability performance of the following GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies
will be analysed and compared:

   • Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu).

   • Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu) (for illustrative purposes).

   • Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu).

   • Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu, TW D = 2 s).

   • Strategy 4: IP control (Kp = 0.0096 pu).

    The design considerations and values of the parameters are depicted in Table 2. Notice
that in the case of VSM without PLL, the damping coefficient plays also the role of frequency
droop and a suitable proportional gain for this purpose must be used: DGF M = 20 pu, which
results in a low damping ratio. An additional case of VSM without PLL is considered using
the same design criteria than the other two VSM-type strategies, but it is just for comparison
purposes (VSM-noPLL with DGF M = 203 pu).
    In Subsection 6.1, non-linear time-domain simulations are carried out to analyse the per-
formance of the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies when a fault occurs. Subsection 6.2
compares the critical clearing times obtained with each GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strat-
egy. Subsection 6.3 analyses the performance of VAPC and the proposed FLC, when they
are applied to the different GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies. Finally, Subsection 6.4
analyses the impact on transient stability of the wash-out-filter time constant in Strategy 3
(VSM-Washout).



                                              21
             Table 2: Design and parameters of GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies.


                                              Specified                    Calculated
           Strategy
                                                values                       value
                                    HGF M = 5 s, DGF M = 20 pu
                                          PFR (implicit):                  ζ = 0.0691
           Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL
                                      KP F R = DGF M = 20 pu            ωn = 14.47 rad/s
                                             TP F R = 0 s
                                        HGF M = 5 s, ζ = 0.7            DGF M = 203 pu
           Strategy 2: VSM-PLL
                                   PFR: KP F R = 20 pu, TP F R = 1 s    ωn = 14.47 rad/s
                                        HGF M = 5 s, ζ = 0.7            DGF M = 203 pu
           Strategy 3: VSM-Washout PFR: KP F R = 20 pu, TP F R = 1 s    ωn = 14.47 rad/s
                                       Wash-out: TW D = 2 s
                                        HGF M = 5 s, ζ = 0.7            KP = 0.0096 pu
           Strategy 4: IP control
                                   PFR: KP F R = 20 pu, TP F R = 1 s    ωn = 14.47 rad/s



6.1. Short-circuit simulation
A three-phase-to-ground short circuit is applied to the line 2-3 of the test system of Fig. 11
at t = 1 s, close to bus 2, and it is cleared 150 ms later (Fault 1, for short). Fig. 12 shows
the angle difference between the GFM-VSC and the grid (δ − δe ) as well as the frequency
deviation of the VSC with respect to the grid frequency. Synchronism is maintained in all
cases, although the IP controller showed the largest angle and frequency increase during
the transient. After the fault clearing, the VSM-noPLL using DGF M = 20 pu exhibits
oscillations before reaching the steady state due to its low damping factor value. However,
VSM-PLL and VSM-Washout (and VSM-noPLL, but with DGF M = 203 pu) present the
smallest variation of the angle difference and the frequency of the GFM-VSC during the
transient, producing the best results in terms of transient stability.
    Fig. 13 displays the GFM-VSC’s active and reactive power injections, and Fig. 14 shows
the voltages and the current injections of the VSC. During the fault, in all self-synchronisation
strategies the active power injection experiences a sharp drop, triggering the converter current
limiter (see Fig. 14) and accelerating the converter. Once the fault is cleared, the active
power injection sharply rises to the limit set by the current limiter (imax
                                                                        s    = 1.25 pu). Finally,
the GFM-VSC controls its modulated voltage according to Fig. 2, and its reactive-power
injection changes accordingly.
    A question that arises is, if the behaviour of VSM with PLL and the IP controller is the-
oretically equivalent (under small disturbances), why do they exhibit so different behaviour
under large disturbances, such as short circuits. In all strategies, during the fault, the con-
verter output power goes to zero (pg = 0). In the IP controller, this leads to the acceleration
of the GFM-VSC as according to equation (13) (see Fig. 4-(c)). Hence, the frequency change
of the GFM-VSC during the fault is higher, being closer to loss of synchronism.
    Finally, Fig. 15 shows the angle difference between the GFM-VSC and the grid when the
clearing time of Fault 1 is 300 ms. Synchronism is lost when the GFM-VSC uses VSM-noPLL
(with DGF M = 20 pu) and IP control, while the system is stable when the GFM-VSC uses
VSM-noPLL (with DGF M = 203 pu), with VSM-PLL and with VSM-Washout, confirming
the conclusions drawn previously.

                                                22
                                  60
                                                                 Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)




                   / ! /e (deg)
                                                                 Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                  40                             Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                 Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                 Strategy 4: IP Control
                                  20


                                   0
                                       0   0.5   1   1.5   2         2.5     3      3.5      4     4.5         5
                                                                    !e
                                                               time   (s)1: VSM-noPLL (D
                                                                 Strategy                    GF M = 20 pu)
                                                                    Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                  51                                Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                    Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                    Strategy 4: IP Control
                           50.5
               ! (Hz)




                                  50

                           49.5

                                  49
                                       0   0.5   1   1.5   2         2.5     3      3.5      4     4.5         5
                                                               time (s)
Figure 12: Fault 1 cleared after 150 ms. (top) Angle difference and (bottom) Frequency of the GFM-VSC.




                           150
               Pg (MW)




                           100

                                  50

                                   0

                             -50
                                       0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5      3      3.5      4      4.5        5
                                                               time (s)
                           150
                                                                 Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)
               Qg (MVAr)




                                                                 Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                           100                                   Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                 Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                  50                             Strategy 4: IP Control


                                   0

                             -50
                                       0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5      3      3.5      4      4.5        5
                                                               time (s)
     Figure 13: Fault 1 cleared after 150 ms. (top) Active and (bottom) Reactive of the GFM-VSC.




                                                               23
                                1
                                                              Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)
                vg (pu)                                       Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                              Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                               0.5                            Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                              Strategy 4: IP Control


                                0
                                     0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5    3      3.5      4     4.5        5
                                                             time (s)
                               1.5
                ig (pu)




                                1


                               0.5


                                0
                                     0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5    3      3.5      4     4.5        5
                                                             time (s)
Figure 14: Fault 1 cleared after 150 ms. (top) voltage at the terminal and (bottom) Current injection of the
GFM-VSC.




                               150
                / ! /e (deg)




                               100                             Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)
                                                               Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                               Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                               Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                50                             Strategy 4: IP Control



                                     0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5    3      3.5      4     4.5        5
                                                             time (s)
               Figure 15: Fault 1 cleared after 300 ms: Angle difference of the GFM-VSC.




                                                             24
6.2. Critical clearing times
The Critical Clearing Time (CCT) of a fault is defined as the maximum duration that it
can have without provoking loss of synchronism, and it is normally used as an indicator for
transient-stability margin. Table 3 presents the critical clearing times (CCTs), in milliseconds
(ms), of the fault simulated in previous subsection (Fault 1, applied to line 2-3, close to
bus 2, of the system of Fig. 11) obtained for the different GFM-VSC self-synchronisation
strategies. The CCT evaluation takes into account the presence or absence of two additional
mechanisms: the proposed frequency limiter (FLC) and the virtual active power control
(VAPC).
    Strategy 1 (VSM-noPLL) was evaluated with two different values of the damping param-
eter (DGF M = 20 and DGF M = 203 pu).
    Strategies VSM-noPLL with DGF M = 203 pu, and VSM-PLL using the same damping
coefficient, exhibit the largest CCTs (1600 ms and 1700 ms, respectively), while VSM-noPLL
but with DGF M = 20 pu has a smaller CCT (280 ms), indicating a poorer transient-stability
performance. Furthermore, the IP-control strategy has the lowest CCT (190 ms), meaning
the worst transient-stability margin. Although the IP controller is similar to the VSM-PLL
strategy in small signal analysis, it differs under large disturbances, due to the fact that
the active-power injection goes close to zero during the fault. This occurs at the frequency
change of the GFM-VSC is higher than the one obtained with other self-synchronisation
strategies, as discussed in previous subsection.

                              Table 3: Critical clearing times (CCTs).

                     GFM-VSC control strategy                 CCT (ms)
                     Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)      280
                     Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)     1600
                     Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)       1700
                     Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)   1020
                     Strategy 4: IP control                      190



6.3. Performance of virtual active power control (VAPC) and proposed frequency (FLC)
      limiter
    Fault 1 with a clearing time of 300 ms is simulated now. Fig. 16 shows the angle differ-
ence of the GFM-VSC when VAPC is implemented (Section 4.1). VAPC concept improves
transient stability when it is applied to all GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies, since
synchronism is maintained in all cases (see Fig. 15 for comparison).
    Fault 1 with a clearing time of 300 ms is simulated now. Fig. 16 shows the angle difference
of the GFM-VSC when the proposed frequency limitation algorithm (FLC) is implemented
(Section 4.2), also for Fault 1 with a clearing time of 300 ms. The frequency of the GFM-VSC
is also showed, to understand the frequency limitation process produced by FLC. Parameters
of Fig. 7 and Eq. (6) are set to ∆ωimax = 0.005 pu, vA,i = 0.5 pu and vB,i = 0.9. The
proposed frequency limiter (FCL) also improves transient stability when it is applied to all
GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies, because synchronism is maintained in all cases.
Notice that the frequency of the GFM-VSC is limited during the fault (Fig. 16), preventing
loss of synchronism.

                                                25
                                                                      Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)
                              100                                     Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                      Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
               / ! /e (deg)                                           Strategy 4: IP Control
                                 50



                                  0



                                 -50
                                       0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5      3      3.5       4       4.5        5
                                                               time (s)
   Figure 16: GFM-VSC with VAPC. Fault 1 cleared after 300 ms: Angle difference of the GFM-VSC.




                                  40                                  Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)
                                                                      Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                      Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                  / ! /e (deg)




                                  30
                                                                      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                  20                                  Strategy 4: IP Control


                                  10

                                   0

                                 -10
                                       0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5      3       3.5      4       4.5        5
                                                               time (s)

                              50.4

                              50.2
               ! (Hz)




                                  50

                              49.8                                      !e
                                                                        Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)
                              49.6                                      Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                                                        Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)
                              49.4                                      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)
                                       0   0.5   1   1.5   2        2.5 Strategy
                                                                               3 4: IP Control
                                                                                       3.5     4      4.5       5
                                                               time (s)
Figure 17: GFM-VSC with proposed FLC. Fault 1 cleared after 300 ms. (top) Angle difference and (bottom)
Frequency of the GFM-VSC.




                                                               26
  Finally, Table 4 shows the CCTs of Fault 1 under different combinations of FLC and
VAPC activation or deactivation:

   • No-FLC/No-VAPC (Base case, second column in Table 4): Neither the FLC nor
     VAPC is used.

   • No-FLC/VAPC (third column in Table 4): VAPC is used only.

   • FLC/No-VAPC (forth column in Table 4): With FLC only.

   • FLC/VAPC (fifth column in Table 4): Both mechanisms are activated.

Table 4: Critical clearing times (CCTs) with and without the proposed frequency limiter (FLC) and virtual
active power control (VAPC).

                                                                     CCT (ms)
                                                          No-FLC                   FLC
      GFM-VSC control strategy
                                                     No-VAPC VAPC           No-VAPC VAPC
      Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu)             280       540          940     1790
      Strategy 1: VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 203 pu)           1600      2640         1600     2640
      Strategy 2: VSM-PLL (DGF M = 203 pu)             1700      3440         1720     3830
      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (DGF M = 203 pu)         1020      1900         1020     1970
      Strategy 4: IP control                            190       390         1160     1830

    The third column in Table 4 (No-FLC/VAPC) demonstrates significant improvements in
the CCTs when using VAPC. Meanwhile columns 4 and 5 (FLC/No-VAPC and FLC/VAPC,
respectively) show the results by applying the proposed frequency limiter for GFM-VSCs.
The proposed frequency limiter also results in significant improvements in CCTs in all the
GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies.
    VSM-noPLL strategy with the lowest damping factor (DGF M = 20 pu) shows a significant
increase in CCT when FLC and/or VAPC are applied. VSM-noPLL experiences a notable
increase in CCT from 280 ms (No-FLC/No-VAPC) to 940 ms when the frequency limiter is
enabled (FLC/No-VAPC), showcasing its effectiveness in improving stability. CCTs reach
1790 ms when both FLC and VAPC are enabled (FLC/VAPC), compared to the base case.
    Significant improvements have also been made to the IP-control strategy, which benefits
considerably from the use of FLC and VAPC. CCT increases from 190 ms without the
mechanisms to 1830 ms with both enabled.
    As a conclusion, the concept of VAPC and the proposed FLC can be applied to all GFM-
VSC self-synchronisation strategies analysed and they are effective to improve transient
stability in all cases. Furthermore, VAPC and FLC can be used together, obtaining further
improvements.

6.4. Strategy 3: VSM-Washout - Effect of the wash-out filter time constant
    In Strategy 3 (VSM-Washout), the time constant of the wash-out filter (TW D ) has an im-
pact of the performance of Strategy 3 (VSM-Washout) and it is analysed now. A summary of
the guidelines for the design of the wash-out filter time constant is as follows (Subsection 3.5):



                                                   27
   • Parameter TW D should be relatively high, in order to avoid interactions and achieve
     a good performance in terms of small-signal stability and transient stability. Ref-
     erence [49] proposes a curve for feasible regions of parameters DGF M and TW D (see
     Fig. 4-(c)), in terms of transient stability, concluding that concluding that TW D ≥ 1 s
     could be a reasonable value for typical parameters.

   • Parameter TW D should not be excessively high, to avoid active-power changes during
     very-slow fluctuations.

   • Then, the guidelines for the design of the GFM-VSC self-synchronisation strategies
     can be used (Table 1 of Subsection 3.5)), assuming a fixed value of TW D . Finally, the
     behaviour should be checked also by time-domain simulation.

     Taking the aspects above into account, the choice of the wash-out filter time constant for
Strategy 3 used in this work was TW D = 2 s.
     The impact of the wash-out filter in Strategy 3 is analysed now for different values of
TW D : TW D = 20 ms, TW D = 20 ms, TW D = 2 s and TW D = 5 s. Fig. 18 shows the angle
difference of the GFM-VSC and the infinite grid, when Fault 1 with a clearing time of 300 ms
is simulated. When TW D = 20 ms, synchronism is lost. When TW D = 200 ms, synchronism is
maintained, but the angle excursions are high. For TW D = 2 s and TW D = 5 s, synchronism
is maintained and angle excursions are much lower than in the other cases.
     In strategy 3 (VSM-Washout), transient-stability behaviour should be also taken into
account. In previous work, the design of the wash-out filter time constant in strategy VSM-
Washout has not been addressed explicitly. However, reference [49] has analysed the impact
of the wash-out filter in the so-called transient damping method (TDM), and conclusions
can be applied directly to the VSM-Washout strategy. The work in [49] proposes a curve
for feasible regions of parameters DGF M and TW D , in terms of transient stability. Mainly,in
order to use high values of DGF M , the wash-out filter time constant should be high enough,
concluding that TW D ≥ 1 s could be a reasonable value, for the test system analysed. In
addition, in Strategy 3 the wash-out filter add a state variable and the closed-loop system
dynamics is more complex and it is not a second-order system any more. However, this
aspect can be addressed by using a high enough value of TW D and it is recommended to
check the results of the design by time-domain simulation. Finally, notice that the wash-out
filter time constant TW D should not be excessively high, because it would not be able to
avoid active-power changes under frequency offsets, which is its role.
     Finally, 5 depicts the CCTs of fault 1 when Strategy 3 is used, for the different values
of the washout filter time constant. The highest CCTs are obtained with TW D = 2 s and
TW D = 5 s, proving clearly that the best results are obtained with these values. When
TW D = 0.20 ms, the system is stable and it is unstable even for small perturbations, that is
why the CCT is 0 ms. This proves that too low values of TW D will produce poor results.




                                              28
                            150




             / ! /e (deg)
                                                                              VSM-Washout (TW D = 20 ms)
                                                                              VSM-Washout (TW D = 200 ms)
                            100                                               VSM-Washout (TW D = 2 s)
                                                                              VSM-Washout (TW D = 5 s)


                             50



                              0
                                  0      0.5    1   1.5    2        2.5   3        3.5      4      4.5      5
                                                               time (s)
             Figure 18: Fault 1 cleared after 300 ms: Angle difference of the GFM-VSC.


                   Table 5: CCTs of VSM-Washout strategy with different time constants.

                                      GFM-VSC control strategy                CCT (ms)
                                      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (TW D = 0.02 s)    0
                                      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (TW D = 0.2 s)    460
                                      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (TW D = 2 s)      1020
                                      Strategy 3: VSM-Washout (TW D = 5 s)      1290


7. Conclusions
This paper analysed and compared transient-stability performance of various self-synchro-
nisation strategies for GFM-VSCs: VSM-noPLL, VSM-PLL, VSM-Washout and IP control.
The paper also analysed different methods to be applied to GFM-VSC self-synchronisation
strategies, aimed to improve their transient-stability performance: the concept of virtual
unsaturated active-power controller (VAPC), proposed in previous work, and an algorithm
for frequency limitation in the GFM-VSCs (FLC), which was proposed in this paper. The
conclusions obtained in this paper can be summarised as follows:

   • The four self-synchronisation mechanisms for GFM-VSCs analysed in this work (VSM-
     noPLL, VSM-PLL, VSM-Washout and IP control) can have a similar behaviour under
     small disturbances by proper tuning of the parameters. However, they can have differ-
     ent behaviour under large disturbances (transient stability), due to non-linearities.

   • Strategies VSM-PLL and VSM-Washout produce the best results in terms of transient
     stability.

   • Strategies VSM-noPLL and IP control produce the lowest critical clearing times (CCTs).

   • Strategy VSM-noPLL (DGF M = 20 pu) produces worse results than other strategies in
     terms on transient stability not due to its control structure, but due to the design of
     the parameters. Since the damping coefficient used in the self-synchronisation strategy
     plays also the role of primary frequency controller, it should be designed with typical


                                                               29
     values for primary-frequency controller proportional gains, which produces a dynamic
     response of the GFM-VSC with lower damping ratio than with other options, and this
     jeopardises transient stability.

   • The IP control produces worse results than other options in therms of transient sta-
     bility due to the active-power signal which is subtracted after the inertial-response
     term. When a fault occurs, the voltage at the PCC becomes close to zero; there-
     fore, the active-power injection becomes close to zero too, producing a high variation
     of the frequency of the GFM-VSC during the fault, being more vulnerable to loss of
     synchronism.

   • The concept of VAPC (proposed in previous work) can be applied to all GFM-VSC
     self-synchronisation strategies and it improves transient stability in all cases.

   • The proposed algorithm for frequency limitation (FLC) can be applied to all GFM-VSC
     self-synchronisation strategies and it improves transient stability in all cases.

   • Applying Virtual Active Power Control (VAPC) or the proposed Frequency Limitation
     Control (FLC) together significantly improves transient stability of the four GFM-VSC
     self-synchronisation strategies analysed, increasing the CCTs.

   • In VSM-Washout strategy, the wash-out-filter time constant should be high enough to
     produce good results in terms of transient stability. Reasonable values could be in the
     range TW D = 1 − 10 s, for the test system considered in this paper.


Acknowledgements
Work supported by the Spanish Government under a research project ref. PRE2019-088084
and RETOS Project Ref. RTI2018-098865-B-C31 (MCI/AEI/FEDER, UE); and by Madrid
Regional Government under PROMINT-CM Project Ref. S2018/EMT-4366.

Contact information of the authors

Régulo E. Ávila-Martínez: regulo.avila@iit.comillas.edu, Xavier Guillaud: xavier.guillaud@centralelille.fr,
Javier Renedo: javier.renedo@ieee.org, Luis Rouco: luis.rouco@iit.comillas.edu, Aurelio Garcia-
Cerrada: aurelio@iit.comillas.edu, Lukas Sigrist: lukas.sigrist@iit.comillas.edu.

Appendix: data
Data of GFM-VSCs are provided in Table 6. Nominal voltage and frequency of the system are
220 kV and 50 Hz, respectively. Parameters of line 2-3 are rg = 0.01 pu, xg = 0.1 pu (base
values for pu: 220 kV and 100 MVA). Initial operating point of the GFM-VSC is Pg0 = 70
MW and vg0 = 1 pu. Constant modulated voltage set-point term was set to e0m = 1.0057 pu.
   When using the frequency limiter (FCL) proposed in Section 4.2, parameters of Fig. 7
and (6) are set to ∆ωimax = 0.005 pu, vA,i = 0.5 pu and vB,i = 0.9.


                                             30
                             Table 6: Parameters of the GFM-VSCs


Parameters                                                             Values
VSC’s rating are base values for pu
Rating VSC, DC voltage, AC voltage                            100 MVA, 640 kV, 400 kV
Max. current                                            1.20 pu (equal priority for d − q axes)
Series resistance (rc,i ) / reactance (xc,i )                     0.005 pu / 0.15 pu
(series reactor + transformer)
(transformer: 100 MVA 400/320 kV)
Current control bandwidth (ωn,CC )                                   1500 rad/s
Current control prop. / int. gains (KC,P,i / KC,I,i )         1.0027 pu / 1074.3 pu/s
Quasi-static model, virt. reactance (xv / xev )                    0 pu / 0.15 pu
Emulated inertia (HGF M,i )                                              5s
Primary freq. controller (KP F R,i / TP F R,i )                      20 pu / 1 s
Primary freq. controller limit (∆pmax g,i )                             1 pu
PLL control bandwidth (ωn,P LL )                                      500 rad/s
PLL control porp. / int. gains (KP,P LL /KI,P LL )           3.1831 pu / 795.7747 pu/s
PLL frequency saturation (∆ωPmax   LL )                               ± 0.1 pu



References
[1] M. Paolone, T. Gaunt, X. Guillaud, M. Liserre, S. Meliopoulos, A. Monti, T. Van Cut-
    sen, V. Vittal, and C. Vournas, “Fundamentals of power systems modelling in the pres-
    ence of converter-interfaced generation,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 189, no.
    106811, pp. 1–33, 2020.

[2] K. Strunz, K. Almunem, C. Wulkow, M. Kuschke, M. Valescudero, and X. Guillaud,
    “Enabling 100 % renewable power systems through power electronic grid-forming con-
    verter and control: System integration for security, stability, and application to europe,”
    Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 111, no. 7, pp. 891–915, 2023.

[3] C. Cardozo, T. Prevost, S.-H. Huang, J. Lu, N. Modi, M. Hishida, X. Li, A. Abdalrah-
    man, P. Samuelsson, T. Van Cutsem, Y. Laba, Y. Lamrani, F. Colas, and X. Guillaud,
    “Promises and challenges of grid forming: Transmission system operator, manufacturer
    and academic view points,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 235, no. 110855, pp.
    1 – 35, 2024.

[4] C. Barker, A. Adamczyk, J. Fradley, and O. Jasim, “Providing Synchronous Grid Form-
    ing Capability through HVDC Transmission,” in The 17th International Conference on
    AC and DC Power Transmission (ACDC 2021), vol. 2021, Jul. 2021, pp. 161–166.

[5] L. Zhang, L. Harnefors, and H.-P. Nee, “Power-Synchronization Control of Grid-
    Connected Voltage-Source Converters,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 25,
    no. 2, pp. 809–820, May 2010.


                                             31
 [6] Q.-C. Zhong and G. Weiss, “Synchronverters: Inverters that mimic synchronous gen-
     erators,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1259–1267,
     2011.

 [7] S. D’Arco and J. A. Suul, “Equivalence of virtual synchronous machines and frequency-
     droops for converter-based microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 1,
     pp. 394–395, 2014.

 [8] S. D’Arco, J. A. Suul, and O. B. Fosso, “A Virtual Synchronous Machine implementation
     for distributed control of power converters in SmartGrids,” Electric Power Systems
     Research, vol. 122, pp. 180–197, 2015.

 [9] J. Roldán-Pérez, A. Rodríguez-Cabero, and M. Prodanovic, “Design and analysis of
     virtual synchronous machines in inductive and resistive weak grids,” IEEE Transactions
     on Energy Conversion, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 1818–1828, 2019.

[10] J. Rocabert, A. Luna, F. Blaabjerg, and P. Rodríguez, “Control of power converters in
     AC microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 4734–
     4749, 2012.

[11] T. Qoria, E. Rokrok, A. Bruyere, B. Francois, and X. Guillaud, “A PLL-Free grid-
     forming control with decoupled functionalities for high-power transmission system ap-
     plications,” IEEE access, no. 106765, pp. 197 363–197 378, 2020.

[12] C. Arghir, T. Jouini, and F. Dörfler, “Grid-forming control for power converters based
     on matching of synchronous machines,” Automatica, vol. 95, pp. 273–282, 2018.

[13] D. Groß, M. Colombino, J.-S. Brouillon, and F. Dörfler, “The Effect of Transmission-
     Line Dynamics on Grid-Forming Dispatchable Virtual Oscillator Control,” IEEE Trans-
     actions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 1148–1160, Sep. 2019.

[14] J. L. Rodriguez Amenedo, S. A. Gomez, J. Alonso-Martinez, and M. G. De Ar-
     mas, “Grid-Forming Converters Control Based on the Reactive Power Synchronization
     Method for Renewable Power Plants,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 67 989–68 007, 2021,
     rodriguezA.

[15] F. Mandrile, V. Mallemaci, E. Carpaneto, and R. Bojoi, “Lead-lag filter-based damping
     of virtual synchronous machines,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 59,
     no. 6, pp. 6900–6913, Nov. 2023.

[16] J. Girona-Badia, V. Albernaz Lacerda, D. Westerman Spier, E. Prieto-Araujo,
     and O. Gomis-Bellmunt, “Resource-aware grid-forming synchronization control: De-
     sign, analysis and validation,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. DOI:
     10.1109/TEC.2024.3486056, pp. 1 – 12, 2024.

[17] F. G. Puricelli, “Bipolar vsc-hvdc links with grid-forming converters – dynamic perfor-
     mance and small-signal stability assessment,” PhD thesis, Institute of Electrical Power
     Systems (EAN), KU Leuven, Belgium, 2025.


                                            32
[18] F. G. Puricelli, P. Rault, C. Cardozo, and J. Beerten, “Analysis and damping of grid-
     forming converters interactions in bipolar hvdc connections using a coordinate transfor-
     mation approach,” International Journal of Electrical Power and Energy Systems, vol.
     165, no. 110469, pp. 1 – 11, 2025.

[19] O. Mo, S. D’Arco, and J. A. Suul, “Evaluation of Virtual Synchronous Machines With
     Dynamic or Quasi-Stationary Machine Models,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Elec-
     tronics, vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 5952–5962, Jul. 2017.

[20] N. Hatziargyriou, J. V. Milanović, C. Rahmann, V. Ajjarapu, C. Canizares, I. Erlich,
     D. Hill, I. Hiskens, I. Kamwa, B. Pal, P. Pourbeik, J. J. Sanchez-Gasca, A. Stanković,
     T. Van Cutsem, V. Vittal, and C. Vournas, “Definition and classification of power system
     stability - revisited and extended,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 36, no. 4,
     pp. 3271–3281, 2021.

[21] F. Andrade, J. Cusidó, and L. Romeral, “Transient stability analysis of inverter-
     interfaced distributed generators in a microgrid system,” in Proc. European conference
     on power electronics and applications, birmingham, UK, 2011, pp. 1–10.

[22] Z. Shuai, C. Shen, X. Liu, Z. Li, and Z. J. Shen, “Transient angle stability of virtual
     synchronous generators using lyapunov’s direct method,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
     Grid, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 4648–4661, 2018.

[23] H. Cheng, Z. Shuai, C. Shen, X. Liu, Z. Li, and Z. J. Shen, “Transient angle stability
     of paralleled synchronous and virtual synchronous generators in islanded microgrids,”
     IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1019–1033, 2020.

[24] D. Pan, X. Wang, F. Liu, and R. Shi, “Transient stability of voltage-source converters
     with grid-forming control: A design-oriented study,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and
     Selected Topics in Power Electronics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1019–1033, 2020.

[25] T. Qoria, F. Gruson, F. Colas, G. Denis, T. Prevost, and X. Guillaud, “Critical clear-
     ing time determination and enhancement of grid-forming converters embedding virtual
     impedance as current limitation algorithm,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected
     Topics in Power Electronics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1050–1061, 2020.

[26] P. Ledesma, F. Arredondo, and M. A. Moreno, “Contribution of grid-forming control to
     angle stability in the iberian peninsula,” IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution,
     vol. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1049/gtd2.70076, pp. 1 – 10, 2025.

[27] T. Qoria, F. Gruson, F. Colas, X. Kestelyn, and X. Guillaud, “Current limiting algo-
     rithms and transient stability analysis of grid-forming VSCs,” Electric Power Systems
     Research, vol. 189, no. 106726, pp. 1–8, 2020.

[28] M. Choopani, S. H. Hosseinian, and B. Vahidi, “New transient stability and LVRT
     improvement of multi-VSG grids using the frequency of the center of inertia,” IEEE
     Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 527–538, 2020.


                                             33
[29] M. Chen, D. Zhou, and F. Blaabjerg, “Enhanced Transient Angle Stability Control of
     Grid-Forming Converter Based on Virtual Synchronous Generator,” IEEE Transactions
     on Industrial Electronics, vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 9133–9144, Sep. 2022.

[30] X. Xiong, C. Wu, and F. Blaabjerg, “An Improved Synchronization Stability Method of
     Virtual Synchronous Generators Based on Frequency Feedforward on Reactive Power
     Control Loop,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 9136–9148,
     Aug. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9328607/

[31] R. E. Ávila Martínez, J. Renedo, L. Rouco, A. García-Cerrada, L. Sigrist, T. Qoria, and
     X. Guillaud, “Fast Voltage Boosters to Improve Transient Stability of Power Systems
     With 100% of Grid-Forming VSC-Based Generation,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
     Conversion, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 2777–2789, Dec. 2022.

[32] W. Si and J. Fang, “Transient Stability Improvement of Grid-Forming Converters
     Through Voltage Amplitude Regulation and Reactive Power Injection,” IEEE
     Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 12 116–12 125, Oct. 2023.
     [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10167833/

[33] X. Luo, Y. Pavan Kumar, A. Kumar Singh, E. I. Batzelis, G. Saridaki, P. Kotsam-
     popoulos, and N. Hatziargyriou, “Boundary analysis of damping methods for virtual
     synchronous generators,” Pre-print, vol. Online: https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/499874/
     (last access 28-7-2025), no. 499874, pp. 1 – 5, 2025.

[34] K. Vatta Kkuni and G. Yang, “Effects of current limit for grid forming converters on
     transient stability: Analysis and solution,” International Journal of Electrical Power
     and Energy Systems, vol. 158, no. 109919, pp. 1–8, 2024.

[35] Y. Laba, A. Bruyère, F. Colas, and X. Guillaud, “Virtual Power-Based Technique for
     Enhancing the Large Voltage Disturbance Stability of HV Grid-Forming Converters,” in
     2023 25th European Conference on Power Electronics and Applications (EPE’23 ECCE
     Europe). Aalborg, Denmark: IEEE, Sep. 2023, pp. 1–8.

[36] Y. Laba, F. Colas, A. Bruyère, T. Prevost, G. Torresan, X. Legrand, and X. Guillaud,
     “Enhancing large disturbance stability of direct voltage grid-forming converters through
     integration of the virtual power method,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics
     in Power Electronics, vol. DOI: 10.1109/JESTPE.2025.3574104, pp. 1 – 13, 2025.

[37] A. Camboni, V. Mallemaci, F. Mandrile, and R. Bojoi, “The virtual power feed-
     back: Enhancing the transient stability of virtual synchronous generators un-
     der current limitation,” IEEE Open Journal of Industry Applications, vol. DOI:
     10.1109/OJIA.2025.3586412, pp. 1 – 16, 2025.

[38] C. Collados-Rodriguez, D. Westerman Spier, M. Cheah-Mane, E. Prieto-Araujo, and
     O. Gomis-Bellmunt, “Preventing loss of synchronism of droop-based grid-forming con-
     verters during frequency excursions,” International Journal of Electrical Power & En-
     ergy Systems, vol. 148, p. 108989, Jun. 2023.


                                             34
[39] W. Du, R. H. Lasseter, and A. S. Khalsa, “Survivability of autonomous microgrid during
     overload events,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 3515 – 3524,
     2019.

[40] W. Du, Q. H. Nguyen, S. Wang, J. Kim, Y. Liu, S. Zhu, F. K. Tuffner, and Z. Huang,
     “Positive-sequence modeling of droop- controlled grid-forming inverters for transient
     stability simulation of transmission systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery,
     vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1736–1748, 2024.

[41] S. M. Mohiuddin, W. Du, X. Lyu, J. Kim, and Q. H. Nguyen, “A two-stage current lim-
     iting control strategy for direct-droop-controlled grid-forming inverters,” IEEE Trans-
     actions on Industry Applications, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 6472 – 6483, 2025.

[42] X. Zhao and D. Flynn, “Freezing grid-forming converter virtual angular speed to enhance
     transient stability under current reference limiting,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Workshop on
     Control and Modeling for Power Electronics (COMPEL), Aalborg, Denmark, 2020, pp.
     1–7.

[43] ——, “Stability enhancement strategies for a 100 % grid-forming and grid-following
     converter-based irish power system,” IET Renewable Power Generation, vol. 16, pp.
     125—-138, 2022.

[44] S. Dadjo Tavakoli, E. Prieto-Araujo, and O. Gomis-Bellmunt, “Fault ride-through con-
     trol based on voltage priorization for grid-forming converters,” IET Renewable Power
     Generation, vol. 17, pp. 1370—-1384, 2022.

[45] Y. Li, Y. Lu, J. Yang, J. Liu, T. Mu, H. Ye, and Z. Du, “Synchronization stability of
     multiple vsgs embedded power system with controller limits,” IEEE Transactions on
     Power Systems, vol. Doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2024.3398637, pp. 1 – 16, 2024.

[46] K. Vatta Kkuni, S. Mohan, G. Yang, and W. Xu, “Comparative assessment of typical
     control realizations of grid forming converters based on their voltage source behaviour,”
     Energy Reports, vol. 9, pp. 6042–6062, Dec. 2023.

[47] E. Rokrok, T. Qoria, A. Bruyere, B. Francois, and X. Guillaud, “Classification and
     dynamic assessment of droop-based grid-forming control schemes: Application in HVDC
     systems,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 189, no. 106765, pp. 1–7, 2020.

[48] DIgSILENT, “Grid-forming Converter Templates. Droop Controlled Converter, Syn-
     chronverter, Virtual Synchronous Machine,” PowerFactory - DIgSILENT - Technical
     Reference, Germany, Tech. Rep., 2022.

[49] X. Xiong, C. Wu, P. Cheng, and F. Blaabjerg, “An optimal damping design of virtual
     synchronous generators for transient stability enhancement,” IEEE Transactions on
     Power Electronics, vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 11 026–11 030, 2021.




                                             35
[50] R. E. Ávila Martínez, J. Renedo, L. Rouco, A. Garcia-Cerrada, L. Sigrist, X. Guillaud,
     and T. Qoria, “Impact of current limiters and fast voltage boosters in grid-forming vsc-
     based generators on transient stability,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 235, no.
     110753, pp. 1–11, 2024.

[51] P. Kundur, Power system stability and control.     McGraw Hill Education, New York,
     NY, USA, 1994.

[52] A. Gómez-Expósito, A. J. Conejo, and C. A. Canizares (Coordinators), Electric energy
     systems: analysis and operation. CRC press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton,
     FL, USA, 2018.

[53] D. Chatterjee, B. Johnson, and G.-S. Seo, “Is equal area criterion applicable for tran-
     sient stability assessment of grid-forming inverters?” TechRxiv, pre-print, vol. DOI:
     10.36227/techrxiv.174889575.57556923/v1, pp. 1 – 6, 2025.

[54] L2EP-LILLE, “VSC_lib: Grid forming models for Matlab/SimPowerSystem,” vol.
     https://github.com/l2ep-epmlab/ (accessed 08-07-2020), 2020.

[55] T. Qoria, Q. Cossart, C. Li, X. Guillaud, F. Colas, F. Gruson, and X. Kestelyn, “WP3-
     Control and Operation of a Grid with 100% Converter-Based Devices. Deliverable 3.2:
     Local control and simulation tools for large transmission systems,” MIGRATE Project,
     Tech. Rep., 2018.

[56] T. Qoria, F. Gruson, F. Colas, G. Denis, T. Prevost, and X. Guillaud, “Inertia effect and
     load sharing capability of grid forming converters connected to a transmission grid,” in
     15th IET int. Conf. on AC and DC power transmission (ACDC), coventry, UK, 2019,
     pp. 1–6.




                                             36
